Chapter I 


THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR 


Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to 
the ground. Hobbits go light, and their footprints are not easy 
even for a Ranger to read, but not far from the top a spring 
crossed the path, and in the wet earth he saw what he was 
seeking. 

¡®I read the signs aright,¡¯ he said to himself. ¡®Frodo ran to 
the hill-top. I wonder what he saw there? But he returned by 
the same way, and went down the hill again.¡¯ 

Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, 
hoping to see there something that would guide him in his 
perplexities; but time was pressing. Suddenly he leaped for- 
ward, and ran to the summit, across the great flag-stones, 
and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked out. 
But the sun seemed darkened, and the world dim and remote. 
He turned from the North back again to North, and saw 
nothing save the distant hills, unless it were that far away he 
could see again a great bird like an eagle high in the air, 
descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth. 

Even as he gazed his quick ears caught sounds in the wood- 
lands below, on the west side of the River. He stiffened. 
There were cries, and among them, to his horror, he could 
distinguish the harsh voices of Ores. Then suddenly with a 
deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the blasts of it 
smote the hills and echoed in the hollows, rising in a mighty 
shout above the roaring of the falls. 

¡®The horn of Boromir!¡¯ he cried. ¡®He is in need!¡¯ He sprang 
down the steps and away, leaping down the path. ¡®Alas! An 
ill fate is on me this day, and all that I do goes amiss. Where 
is Sam?¡¯ 

As he ran the cries came louder, but fainter now and 


538 


THE TWO TOWERS 


desperately the horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the 
yells of the Ores, and suddenly the horn-calls ceased. Aragorn 
raced down the last slope, but before he could reach the hill¡¯s 
foot, the sounds died away; and as he turned to the left and 
ran towards them they retreated, until at last he could hear 
them no more. Drawing his bright sword and crying Elendil! 
Elendil! he crashed through the trees. 

A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far 
from the lake he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back 
to a great tree, as if he was resting. But Aragorn saw that he 
was pierced with many black-feathered arrows; his sword was 
still in his hand, but it was broken near the hilt; his horn 
cloven in two was at his side. Many Ores lay slain, piled all 
about him and at his feet. 

Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and 
strove to speak. At last slow words came. ¡®I tried to take the 
Ring from Frodo,¡¯ he said. ¡®I am sorry. I have paid.¡¯ His 
glance strayed to his fallen enemies; twenty at least lay there. 
¡®They have gone: the Halflings: the Ores have taken them. I 
think they are not dead. Ores bound them.¡¯ He paused and 
his eyes closed wearily. After a moment he spoke again. 

¡®Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my 
people! I have failed.¡¯ 

¡®No!¡¯ said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. 
¡®You have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at 
peace! Minas Tirith shall not fall!¡¯ 

Boromir smiled. 

¡®Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?¡¯ said Aragorn. 

But Boromir did not speak again. 

¡®Alas!¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Thus passes the heir of Denethor, 
Lord of the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the 
Company is all in ruin. It is I that have failed. Vain was 
Gandalf ¡¯s trust in me. What shall I do now? Boromir has laid 
it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; but 
where are the Ring and the Bearer? How shall I find them 
and save the Quest from disaster?¡¯ 



THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR 


539 


He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping 
Boromir¡¯s hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found 
him. They came from the western slopes of the hill, silently, 
creeping through the trees as if they were hunting. Gimli 
had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long knife: all his 
arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they 
halted in amazement; and then they stood a moment with 
heads bowed in grief, for it seemed to them plain what had 
happened. 

¡®Alas!¡¯ said Legolas, coming to Aragorn¡¯s side. We have 
hunted and slain many Ores in the woods, but we should 
have been of more use here. We came when we heard the 
horn - but too late, it seems. I fear you have taken deadly 
hurt.¡¯ 

¡®Boromir is dead,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®I am unscathed, for I was 
not here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was 
away upon the hill.¡¯ 

¡®The hobbits!¡¯ cried Gimli. Where are they then? Where 
is Frodo?¡¯ 

¡®I do not know,¡¯ answered Aragorn wearily. ¡®Before he died 
Boromir told me that the Ores had bound them; he did not 
think that they were dead. I sent him to follow Merry and 
Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam were with him: 
not until it was too late. All that I have done today has gone 
amiss. What is to be done now?¡¯ 

¡®First we must tend the fallen,¡¯ said Legolas. We cannot 
leave him lying like carrion among these foul Ores.¡¯ 

¡®But we must be swift,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®He would not wish us 
to linger. We must follow the Ores, if there is hope that any 
of our Company are living prisoners.¡¯ 

¡®But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them 
or not,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Are we to abandon him? Must we not 
seek him first? An evil choice is now before us!¡¯ 

¡®Then let us do first what we must do,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®We 
have not the time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or 
to raise a mound over him. A cairn we might build.¡¯ 

¡®The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones 



540 


THE TWO TOWERS 


that we could use nearer than the water-side,¡¯ said Gimli. 

¡®Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the 
weapons of his vanquished foes,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®We will send 
him to the Falls of Rauros and give him to Anduin. The 
River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil creature 
dishonours his bones.¡¯ 

Quickly they searched the bodies of the Ores, gathering 
their swords and cloven helms and shields into a heap. 

¡®See!¡¯ cried Aragorn. ¡®Here we find tokens!¡¯ He picked 
out from the pile of grim weapons two knives, leaf-bladed, 
damasked in gold and red; and searching further he found 
also the sheaths, black, set with small red gems. ¡®No ore-tools 
these!¡¯ he said. ¡®They were borne by the hobbits. Doubtless 
the Ores despoiled them, but feared to keep the knives, know- 
ing them for what they are: work of Westernesse, wound 
about with spells for the bane of Mordor. Well, now, if they 
still live, our friends are weaponless. I will take these things, 
hoping against hope, to give them back.¡¯ 

¡®And I,¡¯ said Legolas, ¡®will take all the arrows that I can 
find, for my quiver is empty.¡¯ He searched in the pile and on 
the ground about and found not a few that were undamaged 
and longer in the shaft than such arrows as the Ores were 
accustomed to use. He looked at them closely. 

And Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: ¡®Here lie 
many that are not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, 
from the Misty Mountains, if I know anything of Ores and 
their kinds. And here are others strange to me. Their gear is 
not after the manner of Ores at all!¡¯ 

There were four goblin-soldiers of greater stature, swart, 
slant-eyed, with thick legs and large hands. They were armed 
with short broad-bladed swords, not with the curved scimi- 
tars usual with Ores; and they had bows of yew, in length 
and shape like the bows of Men. Upon their shields they bore 
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black 
field; on the front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, 
wrought of some white metal. 



THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR 541 

¡®I have not seen these tokens before,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®What 
do they mean?¡¯ 

¡®S is for Sauron,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®That is easy to read.¡¯ 

¡®Nay!¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®Sauron does not use the elf-runes.¡¯ 

¡®Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be 
spelt or spoken,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®And he does not use white. 
The Ores in the service of Barad-dur use the sign of the Red 
Eye.¡¯ He stood for a moment in thought. ¡®S is for Saruman, 
I guess,¡¯ he said at length. ¡®There is evil afoot in Isengard, 
and the West is no longer safe. It is as Gandalf feared: by 
some means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. 
It is likely too that he knows of Gandalf ¡¯s fall. Pursuers from 
Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lorien, or they may 
have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. 
Ores travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning 
news. Do you remember the birds?¡¯ 

Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Let 
us bear Boromir away!¡¯ 

¡®But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose 
our course rightly,¡¯ answered Aragorn. 

¡®Maybe there is no right choice,¡¯ said Gimli. 

Taking his axe the Dwarf now cut several branches. These 
they lashed together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks 
upon the frame. Upon this rough bier they carried the body 
of their companion to the shore, together with such trophies 
of his last battle as they chose to send forth with him. It was 
only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for Boromir 
was a man both tall and strong. 

At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier, 
while Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth 
Galen. It was a mile or more, and it was some time before 
they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the shore. 

¡®There is a strange tale to tell!¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®There are 
only two boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the 
other.¡¯ 

¡®Have Ores been there?¡¯ asked Aragorn. 



542 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®We saw no signs of them,¡¯ answered Gimli. ¡®And Ores 
would have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage 
as well.¡¯ 

¡®I will look at the ground when we come there,¡¯ said 
Aragorn. 

Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was 
to bear him away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded 
and placed beneath his head. They combed his long dark 
hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden belt of 
Lorien gleamed about his waist. His helm they set beside 
him, and across his lap they laid the cloven horn and the hilt 
and shards of his sword; beneath his feet they put the swords 
of his enemies. Then fastening the prow to the stern of the 
other boat, they drew him out into the water. They rowed 
sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running 
channel they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The 
steep sides of Tol Brandir were glowing: it was now mid- 
afternoon. As they went south the fume of Rauros rose 
and shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and 
thunder of the falls shook the windless air. 

Sorrowfully they cast loose the funeral boat: there Boromir 
lay, restful, peaceful, gliding upon the bosom of the flowing 
water. The stream took him while they held their own boat 
back with their paddles. He floated by them, and slowly his 
boat departed, waning to a dark spot against the golden light; 
and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros roared on unchanging. 
The River had taken Boromir son of Denethor, and he was 
not seen again in Minas Tirith, standing as he used to stand 
upon the White Tower in the morning. But in Gondor in 
after-days it long was said that the elven-boat rode the falls 
and the foaming pool, and bore him down through Osgiliath, 
and past the many mouths of Anduin, out into the Great Sea 
at night under the stars. 

For a while the three companions remained silent, gazing 
after him. Then Aragorn spoke. ¡®They will look for him from 



THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR 543 

the White Tower,¡¯ he said, ¡®but he will not return from moun- 
tain or from sea.¡¯ Then slowly he began to sing: 

Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass 
grows 

The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes. 

¡® What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you 
bring to me tonight? 

Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?¡¯ 

T saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and 
grey; 

I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away 

Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more. 

The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of 
Denethor. ¡¯ 

¡®O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar, 

But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.¡¯ 

Then Legolas sang: 

From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the 
sandhills and the stones; 

The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans. 

¡®What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring 
to me at eve? 

Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve. ¡¯ 

¡®Ask not of me where he doth dwell - so many bones there 
lie 

On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy 
sky; 

So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea. 

Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends 
to me!¡¯ 

¡®O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south, 

But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea¡¯s 
mouth. ¡¯ 



544 THE TWO TOWERS 

Then Aragorn sang again: 


From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides, and past the 
roaring falls; 

And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls. 

¡®What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring 
to me today? 

What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away. ¡¯ 

¡®Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he 
fought. 

His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water 
brought. 

His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to 
rest; 

And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast. ¡¯ 

¡®O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze 

To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days.¡¯ 

So they ended. Then they turned their boat and drove it 
with all the speed they could against the stream back to Parth 
Galen. 

¡®You left the East Wind to me,¡¯ said Gimli, ¡®but I will say 
naught of it. ¡¯ 

¡®That is as it should be,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®In Minas Tirith 
they endure the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. 
But now Boromir has taken his road, and we must make 
haste to choose our own.¡¯ 

He surveyed the green lawn, quickly but thoroughly, stoop- 
ing often to the earth. ¡®No Ores have been on this ground,¡¯ 
he said. ¡®Otherwise nothing can be made out for certain. All 
our footprints are here, crossing and re-crossing. I cannot tell 
whether any of the hobbits have come back since the search 
for Frodo began.¡¯ He returned to the bank, close to where 
the rill from the spring trickled out into the River. ¡®There are 
some clear prints here,¡¯ he said. ¡®A hobbit waded out into the 
water and back; but I cannot say how long ago.¡¯ 

¡®How then do you read this riddle?¡¯ asked Gimli. 



THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR 


545 


Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the 
camping-place and looked at the baggage. ¡®Two packs are 
missing,¡¯ he said, ¡®and one is certainly Sam¡¯s: it was rather 
large and heavy. This then is the answer: Frodo has gone by 
boat, and his servant has gone with him. Frodo must have 
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill 
and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not do so. Fie 
guessed his master¡¯s mind and came back here before Frodo 
had gone. He did not find it easy to leave Sam behind!¡¯ 

¡®But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?¡¯ 
said Gimli. ¡®That was a strange deed!¡¯ 

¡®And a brave deed,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Sam was right, I think. 
Frodo did not wish to lead any friend to death with him in 
Mordor. But he knew that he must go himself. Something 
happened after he left us that overcame his fear and doubt.¡¯ 

¡®Maybe hunting Ores came on him and he fled,¡¯ said 
Legolas. 

¡®He fled, certainly,¡¯ said Aragorn, ¡®but not, I think, from 
Ores.¡¯ What he thought was the cause of Frodo¡¯s sudden 
resolve and flight Aragorn did not say. The last words of 
Boromir he long kept secret. 

Well, so much at least is now clear,¡¯ said Legolas: ¡®Frodo 
is no longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken 
the boat. And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his 
pack.¡¯ 

¡®Our choice then,¡¯ said Gimli, ¡®is either to take the remain- 
ing boat and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Ores on foot. 
There is little hope either way. We have already lost precious 
hours.¡¯ 

¡®Let me think!¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®And now may I make a right 
choice, and change the evil fate of this unhappy day!¡¯ He 
stood silent for a moment. ¡®I will follow the Ores,¡¯ he said at 
last. ¡®I would have guided Frodo to Mordor and gone with 
him to the end; but if I seek him now in the wilderness, I 
must abandon the captives to torment and death. My heart 
speaks clearly at last: the fate of the Bearer is in my hands no 
longer. The Company has played its part. Yet we that remain 



546 


THE TWO TOWERS 


cannot forsake our companions while we have strength left. 
Come! We will go now. Leave all that can be spared behind! 
We will press on by day and dark!¡¯ 

They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They 
laid beneath it such of their goods as they did not need 
and could not carry away. Then they left Parth Galen. The 
afternoon was fading as they came back to the glade where 
Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the 
Ores. It needed little skill to find. 

¡®No other folk make such a trampling,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®It 
seems their delight to slash and beat down growing things 
that are not even in their way.¡¯ 

¡®But they go with a great speed for all that,¡¯ said Aragorn, 
¡®and they do not tire. And later we may have to search for 
our path in hard bare lands.¡¯ 

¡®Well, after them!¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Dwarves too can go swiftly, 
and they do not tire sooner than Ores. But it will be a long 
chase: they have a long start.¡¯ 

¡®Yes,¡¯ said Aragorn, ¡®we shall all need the endurance of 
Dwarves. But come! With hope or without hope we will 
follow the trail of our enemies. And woe to them, if we prove 
the swifter! We will make such a chase as shall be accounted 
a marvel among the Three Kindreds: Elves, Dwarves, and 
Men. Forth the Three Hunters!¡¯ 

Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. 
On and on he led them, tireless and swift, now that his mind 
was at last made up. The woods about the lake they left 
behind. Long slopes they climbed, dark, hard-edged against 
the sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed 
away, grey shadows in a stony land. 



Chapter 2 


THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees be- 
low, and brooded on the pale margins of the Anduin, but 
the sky was clear. Stars came out. The waxing moon was 
riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks were 
black. They had come to the feet of stony hills, and their 
pace was slower, for the trail was no longer easy to follow. 
Here the highlands of the Emyn Muil ran from North to 
South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of each 
ridge was steep and difficult, but the eastward slopes were 
gentler, furrowed with many gullies and narrow ravines. All 
night the three companions scrambled in this bony land, 
climbing to the crest of the first and tallest ridge, and down 
again into the darkness of a deep winding valley on the other 
side. 

There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a 
brief space. The moon had long gone down before them, the 
stars glittered above them; the first light of day had not yet 
come over the dark hills behind. For the moment Aragorn 
was at a loss: the ore-trail had descended into the valley, but 
there it had vanished. 

Which way would they turn, do you think?¡¯ said Legolas. 
¡®Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, 
if that is their aim as you guess? Or southward to strike the 
Entwash?¡¯ 

¡®They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim 
at,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®And unless there is much amiss in Rohan 
and the power of Saruman is greatly increased, they will take 
the shortest way that they can find over the fields of the 
Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!¡¯ 


548 


THE TWO TOWERS 


The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills, 
and a trickling stream flowed among the boulders at the 
bottom. A cliff frowned upon their right; to their left rose grey 
slopes, dim and shadowy in the late night. They went on for 
a mile or more northwards. Aragorn was searching, bent 
towards the ground, among the folds and gullies leading up 
into the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly 
the Elf gave a cry and the others came running towards him. 

¡®We have already overtaken some of those that we are 
hunting,¡¯ he said. ¡®Look!¡¯ He pointed, and they saw that what 
they had at first taken to be boulders lying at the foot of the 
slope were huddled bodies. Five dead Ores lay there. They 
had been hewn with many cruel strokes, and two had been 
beheaded. The ground was wet with their dark blood. 

¡®Here is another riddle!¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®But it needs the light 
of day, and for that we cannot wait.¡¯ 

¡®Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,¡¯ said 
Legolas. ¡®Enemies of the Ores are likely to be our friends. Do 
any folk dwell in these hi ll s?¡¯ 

¡®No,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®The Rohirrim seldom come here, and 
it is far from Minas Tirith. It might be that some company 
of Men were hunting here for reasons that we do not know. 
Yet I think not.¡¯ 

¡®What do you think?¡¯ said Gimli. 

¡®I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,¡¯ 
answered Aragorn. ¡®These are Northern Ores from far away. 
Among the slain are none of the great Ores with the strange 
badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is no uncommon 
thing with these foul folk. Maybe there was some dispute 
about the road.¡¯ 

¡®Or about the captives,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Let us hope that they, 
too, did not meet their end here.¡¯ 

Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle, but no other 
traces of the fight could be found. They went on. Already 
the eastward sky was turning pale; the stars were fading, and 
a grey light was slowly growing. A little further north they 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


549 


came to a fold in which a tiny stream, falling and winding, 
had cut a stony path down into the valley. In it some bushes 
grew, and there were patches of grass upon its sides. 

¡®At last!¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Here are the tracks that we seek! 
Up this water-channel: this is the way that the Ores went 
after their debate.¡¯ 

Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new 
path. As if fresh from a night¡¯s rest they sprang from stone 
to stone. At last they reached the crest of the grey hill, and a 
sudden breeze blew in their hair and stirred their cloaks: the 
chill wind of dawn. 

Turning back they saw across the River the far hills 
kindled. Day leaped into the sky. The red rim of the sun rose 
over the shoulders of the dark land. Before them in the West 
the world lay still, formless and grey; but even as they looked, 
the shadows of night melted, the colours of the waking earth 
returned: green flowed over the wide meads of Rohan; the 
white mists shimmered in the water-vales; and far off to the 
left, thirty leagues or more, blue and purple stood the White 
Mountains, rising into peaks of jet, tipped with glimmering 
snows, flushed with the rose of morning. 

¡®Gondor! Gondor!¡¯ cried Aragorn. Would that I looked on 
you again in happier hour! Not yet does my road lie south- 
ward to your bright streams. 

Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea! 

West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree 

Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old. 

O proud walls! Wliite towers! O winged crown and throne of 
gold! 

O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree, 

Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the 
Sea? 

Now let us go!¡¯ he said, drawing his eyes away from the South, 
and looking out west and north to the way that he must tread. 



550 


THE TWO TOWERS 


The ridge upon which the companions stood went down 
steeply before their feet. Below it twenty fathoms or more, 
there was a wide and rugged shelf which ended suddenly in 
the brink of a sheer cliff: the East Wall of Rohan. So ended 
the Emyn Muil, and the green plains of the Rohirrim 
stretched away before them to the edge of sight. 

¡®Look!¡¯ cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above 
them. ¡®There is the eagle again! He is very high. He seems to 
be flying now away, from this land back to the North. He is 
going with great speed. Look!¡¯ 

¡®No, not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas,¡¯ said 
Aragorn. ¡®He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his 
errand, if he is the same bird that I have seen before. But 
look! I can see something nearer at hand and more urgent; 
there is something moving over the plain!¡¯ 

¡®Many things,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®It is a great company on foot; 
but I cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may 
be. They are many leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the 
flatness of the plain is hard to measure.¡¯ 

¡®I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to 
tell us which way to go,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Let us find a path down 
to the fields as quick as may be.¡¯ 

¡®I doubt if you will find a path quicker than the one that 
the Ores chose,¡¯ said Aragorn. 

They followed their enemies now by the clear light of day. 
It seemed that the Ores had pressed on with all possible 
speed. Every now and again the pursuers found things that 
had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the rinds and 
crusts of hard grey bread, a torn black cloak, a heavy iron- 
nailed shoe broken on the stones. The trail led them north 
along the top of the escarpment, and at length they came to 
a deep cleft carved in the rock by a stream that splashed 
noisily down. In the narrow ravine a rough path descended 
like a steep stair into the plain. 

At the bottom they came with a strange suddenness on the 
grass of Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot 
of the Emyn Muil. The falling stream vanished into a deep 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


551 


growth of cresses and water-plants, and they could hear it 
tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle slopes 
towards the fens of Entwash Vale far away. They seemed to 
have left winter clinging to the hills behind. Here the air was 
softer and warmer, and faintly scented, as if spring was 
already stirring and the sap was flowing again in herb and 
leaf. Legolas took a deep breath, like one that drinks a great 
draught after long thirst in barren places. 

¡®Ah! the green smell!¡¯ he said. ¡®It is better than much sleep. 
Let us run!¡¯ 

¡®Light feet may run swiftly here,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®More 
swiftly, maybe, than iron-shod Ores. Now we have a chance 
to lessen their lead!¡¯ 

They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong 
scent, and an eager light was in their eyes. Nearly due west 
the broad swath of the marching Ores tramped its ugly slot; 
the sweet grass of Rohan had been bruised and blackened as 
they passed. Presently Aragorn gave a cry and turned aside. 

¡®Stay!¡¯ he shouted. ¡®Do not follow me yet!¡¯ He ran quickly 
to the right, away from the main trail; for he had seen foot- 
prints that went that way, branching off from the others, the 
marks of small unshod feet. These, however, did not go far 
before they were crossed by ore-prints, also coming out from 
the main trail behind and in front, and then they curved 
sharply back again and were lost in the trampling. At the 
furthest point Aragorn stooped and picked up something 
from the grass; then he ran back. 

¡®Yes,¡¯ he said, ¡®they are quite plain: a hobbit¡¯s footprints. 
Pippin¡¯s, I think. He is smaller than the others. And look at 
this!¡¯ He held up a thing that glittered in the sunlight. It 
looked like the new-opened leaf of a beech-tree, fair and 
strange in that treeless plain. 

¡®The brooch of an elven-cloak!¡¯ cried Legolas and Gimli 
together. 

¡®Not idly do the leaves of Lorien fall,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®This 
did not drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any 



552 


THE TWO TOWERS 


that might follow. I think Pippin ran away from the trail for 
that purpose.¡¯ 

¡®Then he at least was alive,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®And he had the 
use of his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We 
do not pursue in vain.¡¯ 

¡®Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,¡¯ 
said Legolas. ¡®Come! Let us go on! The thought of those 
merry young folk driven like cattle burns my heart.¡¯ 

The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down 
the sky. Light clouds came up out of the sea in the distant 
South and were blown away upon the breeze. The sun sank. 
Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from the 
East. Still the hunters held on. One day now had passed since 
Boromir fell, and the Ores were yet far ahead. No longer 
could any sight of them be seen in the level plains. 

As nightshade was closing about them Aragorn halted. 
Only twice in the day¡¯s march had they rested for a brief 
while, and twelve leagues now lay between them and the 
eastern wall where they had stood at dawn. 

¡®We have come at last to a hard choice,¡¯ he said. ¡®Shall we 
rest by night, or shall we go on while our will and strength 
hold?¡¯ 

¡®Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, 
if we stay to sleep,¡¯ said Legolas. 

¡®Surely even Ores must pause on the march?¡¯ said Gimli. 

¡®Seldom will Ores journey in the open under the sun, yet 
these have done so,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®Certainly they will not rest 
by night.¡¯ 

¡®But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,¡¯ said 
Gimli. 

¡®The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far 
as my eyes can see,¡¯ said Legolas. 

¡®Maybe, I could lead you at guess in the darkness and hold 
to the line,¡¯ said Aragorn; ¡®but if we strayed, or they turned 
aside, then when light came there might be long delay before 
the trail was found again.¡¯ 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


553 


¡®And there is this also,¡¯ said Gimli: ¡®only by day can we 
see if any tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or 
if one should be carried off, eastward, say, to the Great 
River, towards Mordor, we might pass the signs and never 
know it.¡¯ 

¡®That is true,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®But if I read the signs back 
yonder rightly, the Ores of the White Hand prevailed, and 
the whole company is now bound for Isengard. Their present 
course bears me out.¡¯ 

¡®Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,¡¯ said 
Gimli. ¡®And what of escape? In the dark we should have 
passed the signs that led you to the brooch.¡¯ 

¡®The Ores will be doubly on their guard since then, and 
the prisoners even wearier,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®There will be no 
escape again, if we do not contrive it. How that is to be done 
cannot be guessed, but first we must overtake them.¡¯ 

¡®And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least 
hardy of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard with- 
out any pause,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®My heart burns me too, and I 
would have started sooner; but now I must rest a little to run 
the better. And if we rest, then the blind night is the time to 
do so.¡¯ 

¡®I said that it was a hard choice,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®How shall 
we end this debate?¡¯ 

¡®You are our guide,¡¯ said Gimli, ¡®and you are skilled in the 
chase. You shall choose.¡¯ 

¡®My heart bids me go on,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®But we must hold 
together. I will follow your counsel.¡¯ 

¡®You give the choice to an ill chooser,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Since 
we passed through the Argonath my choices have gone 
amiss.¡¯ He fell silent, gazing north and west into the gathering 
night for a long while. 

¡®We will not walk in the dark,¡¯ he said at length. ¡®The 
peril of missing the trail or signs of other coming and going 
seems to me the greater. If the Moon gave enough light, we 
would use it, but alas! he sets early and is yet young and 
pale.¡¯ 



554 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®And tonight he is shrouded anyway,¡¯ Gimli murmured. 
¡®Would that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she 
gave to Frodo!¡¯ 

¡®It will be more needed where it is bestowed,¡¯ said Aragorn. 
¡®With him lies the true Quest. Ours is but a small matter in 
the great deeds of this time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, 
maybe, which no choice of mine can mar or mend. Well, I 
have chosen. So let us use the time as best we may!¡¯ 

He cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, 
for he had not slept since their night under the shadow of 
Tol Brandir. Before dawn was in the sky he woke and rose. 
Gimli was still deep in slumber, but Legolas was standing, 
gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as 
a young tree in a windless night. 

¡®They are far far away,¡¯ he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 
¡®I know in my heart that they have not rested this night. Only 
an eagle could overtake them now.¡¯ 

¡®Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,¡¯ said Aragorn. 
Stooping he roused the Dwarf. ¡®Come! We must go,¡¯ he said. 
¡®The scent is growing cold.¡¯ 

¡®But it is still dark,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Even Legolas on a hill-top 
could not see them till the Sun is up.¡¯ 

¡®I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, 
under moon or sun,¡¯ said Legolas. 

Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour,¡¯ said 
Aragorn. ¡®The land must groan under their hated feet.¡¯ He 
stretched himself upon the ground with his ear pressed 
against the turf. He lay there motionless, for so long a time 
that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again. 
Dawn came glimmering, and slowly a grey light grew about 
them. At last he rose, and now his friends could see his face: 
it was pale and drawn, and his look was troubled. 

¡®The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,¡¯ he said. 
¡®Nothing walks upon it for many miles about us. Faint and 
far are the feet of our enemies. But loud are the hoofs of the 
horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them, even as I lay 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


555 


on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams: horses 
galloping, passing in the West. But now they are drawing 
ever further from us, riding northward. I wonder what is 
happening in this land!¡¯ 

¡®Let us go!¡¯ said Legolas. 

So the third day of their pursuit began. During all its long 
hours of cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now strid- 
ing, now running, as if no weariness could quench the fire 
that burned them. They seldom spoke. Over the wide solitude 
they passed and their elven-cloaks faded against the back- 
ground of the grey-green fields; even in the cool sunlight of 
mid-day few but Elvish eyes would have marked them, until 
they were close at hand. Often in their hearts they thanked 
the Lady of Lorien for the gift of lembas , for they could eat 
of it and find new strength even as they ran. 

All day the track of their enemies led straight on, going 
north-west without a break or turn. As once again the day 
wore to its end they came to long treeless slopes, where the 
land rose, swelling up towards a line of low humpbacked 
downs ahead. The ore-trail grew fainter as it bent north 
towards them, for the ground became harder and the grass 
shorter. Far away to the left the river Entwash wound, a silver 
thread in a green floor. No moving thing could be seen. Often 
Aragorn wondered that they saw no sign of beast or man. 
The dwellings of the Rohirrim were for the most part many 
leagues away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the 
White Mountains, now hidden in mist and cloud; yet the 
Horse-lords had formerly kept many herds and studs in 
the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there 
the herdsmen had wandered much, living in camp and tent, 
even in winter-time. But now all the land was empty, and 
there was a silence that did not seem to be the quiet of peace. 

At dusk they halted again. Now twice twelve leagues they 
had passed over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn 
Muil was lost in the shadows of the East. The young moon 



556 


THE TWO TOWERS 


was glimmering in a misty sky, but it gave small light, and 
the stars were veiled. 

¡®Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our 
chase,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®The Ores have run before us, as if the 
very whips of Sauron were behind them. I fear they have 
already reached the forest and the dark hills, and even now 
are passing into the shadows of the trees.¡¯ 

Gimli ground his teeth. ¡®This is a bitter end to our hope 
and to all our toil!¡¯ he said. 

¡®To hope, maybe, but not to toil,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®We shall 
not turn back here. Yet I am weary.¡¯ He gazed back along 
the way that they had come towards the night gathering in 
the East. ¡®There is something strange at work in this land. I 
distrust the silence. I distrust even the pale Moon. The stars 
are faint; and I am weary as I have seldom been before, weary 
as no Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is 
some will that lends speed to our foes and sets an unseen 
barrier before us: a weariness that is in the heart more than 
in the limb.¡¯ 

¡®Truly!¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®That I have known since first we 
came down from the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind 
us but before us.¡¯ He pointed away over the land of Rohan 
into the darkling West under the sickle moon. 

¡®Saruman!¡¯ muttered Aragorn. ¡®But he shall not turn us 
back! Halt we must once more; for, see! even the Moon is 
falling into gathering cloud. But north lies our road between 
down and fen when day returns.¡¯ 

As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever 
slept. ¡®Awake! Awake!¡¯ he cried. ¡®It is a red dawn. Strange 
things await us by the eaves of the forest. Good or evil, I do 
not know; but we are called. Awake!¡¯ 

The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off 
again. Slowly the downs drew near. It was still an hour before 
noon when they reached them: green slopes rising to bare 
ridges that ran in a line straight towards the North. At their 
feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


557 


of sunken land, some ten miles wide, lay between them and 
the river wandering deep in dim thickets of reed and rush. 
Just to the West of the southernmost slope there was a great 
ring, where the turf had been torn and beaten by many tramp- 
ling feet. From it the ore-trail ran out again, turning north 
along the dry skirts of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined 
the tracks closely. 

¡®They rested here a while,¡¯ he said, ¡®but even the outward 
trail is already old. I fear that your heart spoke truly, Legolas: 
it is thrice twelve hours, I guess, since the Ores stood where 
we now stand. If they held to their pace, then at sundown 
yesterday they would reach the borders of Fangorn.¡¯ 

¡®I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling 
into mist,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Could we see the forest, if we climbed 
the hills?¡¯ 

¡®It is still far away,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®If I remember rightly, 
these downs run eight leagues or more to the north, and then 
north-west to the issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide 
land, another fifteen leagues it may be.¡¯ 

¡®Well, let us go on,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®My legs must forget the 
miles. They would be more willing, if my heart were less 
heavy.¡¯ 

The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the 
end of the line of downs. For many hours they had marched 
without rest. They were going slowly now, and Gimli¡¯s back 
was bent. Stone -hard are the Dwarves in labour or journey, 
but this endless chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed 
in his heart. Aragorn walked behind him, grim and silent, 
stooping now and again to scan some print or mark upon the 
ground. Only Legolas still stepped as lightly as ever, his feet 
hardly seeming to press the grass, leaving no footprints as he 
passed; but in the waybread of the Elves he found all the 
sustenance that he needed, and he could sleep, if sleep it 
could be called by Men, resting his mind in the strange paths 
of Elvish dreams, even as he walked open-eyed in the light 
of this world. 



558 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®Let us go up on to this green hill!¡¯ he said. Wearily they 
followed him, climbing the long slope, until they came out 
upon the top. It was a round hill smooth and bare, stand- 
ing by itself, the most northerly of the downs. The sun sank 
and the shadows of evening fell like a curtain. They were 
alone in a grey formless world without mark or measure. 
Only far away north-west there was a deeper darkness against 
the dying light: the Mountains of Mist and the forest at their 
feet. 

¡®Nothing can we see to guide us here,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Well, 
now we must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing 
cold!¡¯ 

¡®The wind is north from the snows,¡¯ said Aragorn. 

¡®And ere morning it will be in the East,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®But 
rest, if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow 
is unknown. Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun.¡¯ 

¡®Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought 
no counsel,¡¯ said Gimli. 

The night grew ever colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept fit- 
fully, and whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing 
beside them, or walking to and fro, singing softly to himself 
in his own tongue, and as he sang the white stars opened in 
the hard black vault above. So the night passed. Together 
they watched the dawn grow slowly in the sky, now bare and 
cloudless, until at last the sunrise came. It was pale and clear. 
The wind was in the East and all the mists had rolled away; 
wide lands lay bleak about them in the bitter light. 

Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the 
Wold of Rohan that they had already glimpsed many days 
ago from the Great River. North-westward stalked the dark 
forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy 
eaves, and its further slopes faded into the distant blue. 
Beyond there glimmered far away, as if floating on a grey 
cloud, the white head of tall Methedras, the last peak of the 
Misty Mountains. Out of the forest the Entwash flowed 
to meet them, its stream now swift and narrow, and its 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 559 

banks deep-cloven. The ore-trail turned from the downs 
towards it. 

Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then 
the river back towards the forest, Aragorn saw a shadow on 
the distant green, a dark swift-moving blur. He cast himself 
upon the ground and listened again intently. But Legolas 
stood beside him, shading his bright elven-eyes with his long 
slender hand, and he saw not a shadow, nor a blur, but the 
small figures of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of 
morning on the tips of their spears was like the twinkle of 
minute stars beyond the edge of mortal sight. Far behind 
them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads. 

There was a silence in the empty fields, and Gimli could 
hear the air moving in the grass. 

¡®Riders!¡¯ cried Aragorn, springing to his feet. ¡®Many riders 
on swift steeds are coming towards us!¡¯ 

¡®Yes,¡¯ said Legolas, ¡®there are one hundred and five. Yellow 
is their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very 
tall.¡¯ 

Aragorn smiled. ¡®Keen are the eyes of the Elves,¡¯ he said. 

¡®Nay! The riders are little more than five leagues distant,¡¯ 
said Legolas. 

¡®Five leagues or one,¡¯ said Gimli, ¡®we cannot escape them 
in this bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our 
way?¡¯ 

¡®We will wait,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®I am weary, and our hunt 
has failed. Or at least others were before us; for these horse- 
men are riding back down the ore-trail. We may get news 
from them.¡¯ 

¡®Or spears,¡¯ said Gimli. 

¡®There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,¡¯ said 
Legolas. 

¡®I did not say that we should hear good news,¡¯ said Aragorn. 
¡®But evil or good we will await it here.¡¯ 

The three companions now left the hill-top, where they 
might be an easy mark against the pale sky, and they walked 
slowly down the northward slope. A little above the hill¡¯s foot 



560 


THE TWO TOWERS 


they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about them, they sat 
huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed 
slowly and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli 
was uneasy. 

¡®What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?¡¯ he said. 
¡®Do we sit here waiting for sudden death?¡¯ 

¡®I have been among them,¡¯ answered Aragorn. ¡®They are 
proud and wilful, but they are true-hearted, generous in 
thought and deed; bold but not cruel; wise but unlearned, 
writing no books but singing many songs, after the manner 
of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not 
know what has happened here of late, nor in what mind the 
Rohirrim may now be between the traitor Saruman and 
the threat of Sauron. They have long been the friends of the 
people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was 
in forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them 
out of the North, and their kinship is rather with the Bardings 
of Dale, and with the Beornings of the Wood, among whom 
may still be seen many men tall and fair, as are the Riders of 
Rohan. At least they will not love the Ores.¡¯ 

¡®But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to 
Mordor,¡¯ said Gimli. 

¡®I believe it no more than did Boromir,¡¯ answered Aragorn. 

¡®You will soon learn the truth,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®Already they 
approach.¡¯ 

At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of gallop- 
ing hoofs. The horsemen, following the trail, had turned from 
the river, and were drawing near the downs. They were riding 
like the wind. 

Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the 
fields. Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and 
the foremost horseman swerved, passing by the foot of the 
hill, and leading the host back southward along the western 
skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long line of mail- 
clad men, swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon. 

Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean- 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


561 


limbed; their grey coats glistened, their long tails flowed in 
the wind, their manes were braided on their proud necks. 
The Men that rode them matched them well: tall and long- 
limbed; their hair, flaxen-pale, flowed under their light helms, 
and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were 
stern and keen. In their hands were tall spears of ash, painted 
shields were slung at their backs, long swords were at their 
belts, their burnished shirts of mail hung down upon their 
knees. 

In pairs they galloped by, and though every now and then 
one rose in his stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side, 
they appeared not to perceive the three strangers sitting 
silently and watching them. The host had almost passed when 
suddenly Aragorn stood up, and called in a loud voice: 

¡®What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?¡¯ 

With astonishing speed and skill they checked their steeds, 
wheeled, and came charging round. Soon the three com- 
panions found themselves in a ring of horsemen moving in a 
running circle, up the hill-slope behind them and down, 
round and round them, and drawing ever inwards. Aragorn 
stood silent, and the other two sat without moving, wondering 
what way things would turn. 

Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A 
thicket of spears were pointed towards the strangers; and 
some of the horsemen had bows in hand, and their arrows 
were already fitted to the string. Then one rode forward, a 
tall man, taller than all the rest; from his helm as a crest a 
white horsetail flowed. He advanced until the point of his 
spear was within a foot of Aragorn¡¯s breast. Aragorn did not 
stir. 

Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?¡¯ said 
the Rider, using the Common Speech of the West, in manner 
and tone like to the speech of Boromir, Man of Gondor. 

¡®I am called Strider,¡¯ answered Aragorn. ¡®I came out of the 
North. I am hunting Ores.¡¯ 

The Rider leaped from his horse. Giving his spear to 



562 


THE TWO TOWERS 


another who rode up and dismounted at his side, he drew his 
sword and stood face to face with Aragorn, surveying him 
keenly, and not without wonder. At length he spoke again. 

¡®At first I thought that you yourselves were Ores,¡¯ he said; 
¡®but now I see that it is not so. Indeed you know little of Ores, 
if you go hunting them in this fashion. They were swift and 
well-armed, and they were many. You would have changed 
from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them. But 
there is something strange about you, Strider.¡¯ He bent his 
clear bright eyes again upon the Ranger. ¡®That is no name 
for a Man that you give. And strange too is your raiment. 
Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you escape our 
sight? Are you Elvish folk?¡¯ 

¡®No,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®One only of us is an Elf, Legolas 
from the Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood. But we have 
passed through Lothlorien, and the gifts and favour of the 
Lady go with us.¡¯ 

The Rider looked at them with renewed wonder, but his 
eyes hardened. ¡®Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, 
as old tales tell!¡¯ he said. ¡®Few escape her nets, they say. These 
are strange days! But if you have her favour, then you also 
are net-weavers and sorcerers, maybe.¡¯ He turned a cold 
glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli. ¡®Why do you not 
speak, silent ones?¡¯ he demanded. 

Gimli rose and planted his feet firmly apart: his hand 
gripped the handle of his axe, and his dark eyes flashed. ¡®Give 
me your name, horse-master, and I will give you mine, and 
more besides,¡¯ he said. 

¡®As for that,¡¯ said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 
¡®the stranger should declare himself first. Yet I am named 
Eomer son of Eomund, and am called the Third Marshal of 
Riddermark.¡¯ 

¡®Then Eomer son of Eomund, Third Marshal of Ridder- 
mark, let Gimli the Dwarf Gloin¡¯s son warn you against 
foolish words. You speak evil of that which is fair beyond the 
reach of your thought, and only little wit can excuse you.¡¯ 

Eomer¡¯s eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


563 


angrily, and closed in, advancing their spears. ¡®I would cut 
off your head, beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a 
little higher from the ground,¡¯ said Eomer. 

¡®He stands not alone,¡¯ said Legolas, bending his bow and 
fitting an arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 
¡®You would die before your stroke fell.¡¯ 

Eomer raised his sword, and things might have gone ill, 
but Aragorn sprang between them, and raised his hand. ¡®Your 
pardon, Eomer!¡¯ he cried. ¡®When you know more you will 
understand why you have angered my companions. We 
intend no evil to Rohan, nor to any of its folk, neither to man 
nor to horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?¡¯ 

¡®I will,¡¯ said Eomer lowering his blade. ¡®But wanderers in 
the Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these 
days of doubt. First tell me your right name.¡¯ 

¡®First tell me whom you serve,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Are you 
friend or foe of Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?¡¯ 

¡®I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Theoden King son of 
Thengel,¡¯ answered Eomer. We do not serve the Power of 
the Black Land far away, but neither are we yet at open war 
with him; and if you are fleeing from him, then you had best 
leave this land. There is trouble now on all our borders, and 
we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live 
as we have lived, keeping our own, and serving no foreign 
lord, good or evil. We welcomed guests kindly in the better 
days, but in these times the unbidden stranger finds us swift 
and hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve? At 
whose command do you hunt Ores in our land?¡¯ 

¡®I serve no man,¡¯ said Aragorn; ¡®but the servants of Sauron 
I pursue into whatever land they may go. There are few 
among mortal Men who know more of Ores; and I do not 
hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Ores whom we 
pursued took captive two of my friends. In such need a man 
that has no horse will go on foot, and he will not ask for leave 
to follow the trail. Nor will he count the heads of the enemy 
save with a sword. I am not weaponless.¡¯ 

Aragorn threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered 



564 


THE TWO TOWERS 


as he grasped it, and the bright blade of Anduril shone like a 
sudden flame as he swept it out. ¡®Elendil!¡¯ he cried. ¡®I am 
Aragorn son of Arathorn, and am called Elessar, the Elfstone, 
Dunadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil¡¯s son of Gondor. Here 
is the Sword that was Broken and is forged again! Will you 
aid me or thwart me? Choose swiftly!¡¯ 

Gimli and Legolas looked at their companion in amaze- 
ment, for they had not seen him in this mood before. He 
seemed to have grown in stature while Eomer had shrunk; 
and in his living face they caught a brief vision of the power 
and majesty of the lungs of stone. For a moment it seemed 
to the eyes of Legolas that a white flame flickered on the 
brows of Aragorn like a shining crown. 

Eomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He 
cast down his proud eyes. ¡®These are indeed strange days,¡¯ 
he muttered. ¡®Dreams and legends spring to life out of the 
grass. 

¡®Tell me, lord,¡¯ he said, ¡®what brings you here? And what 
was the meaning of the dark words? Long has Boromir son 
of Denethor been gone seeking an answer, and the horse that 
we lent him came back riderless. What doom do you bring 
out of the North?¡¯ 

¡®The doom of choice,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®You may say this to 
Theoden son of Thengel: open war lies before him, with 
Sauron or against him. None may live now as they have lived, 
and few shall keep what they call their own. But of these great 
matters we will speak later. If chance allows, I will come 
myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for 
help, or at least for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing 
an ore-host that carried off our friends. What can you tell 
us?¡¯ 

¡®That you need not pursue them further,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®The 
Ores are destroyed.¡¯ 

¡®And our friends?¡¯ 

We found none but Ores.¡¯ 

¡®But that is strange indeed,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Did you search 
the slain? Were there no bodies other than those of ore-kind? 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 565 

They would be small, only children to your eyes, unshod but 
clad in grey.¡¯ 

¡®There were no dwarves nor children,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®We 
counted all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled 
the carcases and burned them, as is our custom. The ashes 
are smoking still.¡¯ 

¡®We do not speak of dwarves or children,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Our 
friends were hobbits.¡¯ 

¡®Hobbits?¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®And what may they be? It is a 
strange name.¡¯ 

¡®A strange name for a strange folk,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®But these 
were very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan 
of the words that troubled Minas Tirith. They spoke of the 
Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.¡¯ 

¡®Halflings!¡¯ laughed the Rider that stood beside Eomer. 
¡®Halflings! But they are only a little people in old songs and 
children¡¯s tales out of the North. Do we walk in legends or 
on the green earth in the daylight?¡¯ 

¡®A man may do both,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®For not we but those 
who come after will make the legends of our time. The green 
earth, say you? That is a mighty matter of legend, though 
you tread it under the light of day!¡¯ 

¡®Time is pressing,¡¯ said the Rider, not heeding Aragorn. 
We must hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to 
their fancies. Or let us bind them and take them to the king.¡¯ 

¡®Peace, Eothain!¡¯ said Eomer in his own tongue. ¡®Leave me 
a while. Tell the eored to assemble on the path, and make 
ready to ride to the Entwade.¡¯ 

Muttering Eothain retired, and spoke to the others. Soon 
they drew off and left Eomer alone with the three com- 
panions. 

¡®All that you say is strange, Aragorn,¡¯ he said. ¡®Yet you 
speak the truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, 
and therefore they are not easily deceived. But you have not 
told all. Will you not now speak more fully of your errand, 
so that I may judge what to do?¡¯ 



566 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many 
weeks ago,¡¯ answered Aragorn. ¡®With me went Boromir of 
Minas Tirith. My errand was to go to that city with the son 
of Denethor, to aid his folk in their war against Sauron. But 
the Company that I journeyed with had other business. Of 
that I cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.¡¯ 

¡®Gandalf !¡¯ Eomer exclaimed. ¡®Gandalf Greyhame is known 
in the Mark; but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password 
to the king¡¯s favour. He has been a guest in the land many 
times in the memory of men, coming as he will, after a season, 
or after many years. He is ever the herald of strange events: 
a bringer of evil, some now say. 

¡®Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have 
gone amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. 
Until then we counted Saruman our friend, but Gandalf 
came then and warned us that sudden war was preparing in 
Isengard. He said that he himself had been a prisoner in 
Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he begged for help. 
But Theoden would not listen to him, and he went away. 
Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in Theoden¡¯s ears! He 
is wroth. For Gandalf took the horse that is called Shadowfax, 
the most precious of all the king¡¯s steeds, chief of the Mearas, 
which only the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of 
their race was the great horse of Eorl that knew the speech 
of Men. Seven nights ago Shadowfax returned; but the king¡¯s 
anger is not less, for now the horse is wild and will let no 
man handle him.¡¯ 

¡®Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far 
North,¡¯ said Aragorn; ¡®for it was there that he and Gandalf 
parted. But alas! Gandalf will ride no longer. He fell into 
darkness in the Mines of Moria and comes not again.¡¯ 

¡®That is heavy tidings,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®At least to me, and to 
many; though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the 
king.¡¯ 

¡®It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can under- 
stand, though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much 
older,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®But when the great fall, the less must 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


567 


lead. My part it has been to guide our Company on the long 
road from Moria. Through Lorien we came - of which it 
were well that you should learn the truth ere you speak of it 
again - and thence down the leagues of the Great River to 
the falls of Rauros. There Boromir was slain by the same 
Ores whom you destroyed.¡¯ 

¡®Your news is all of woe!¡¯ cried Eomer in dismay. ¡®Great 
harm is this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a 
worthy man! All spoke his praise. He came seldom to the 
Mark, for he was ever in the wars on the East-borders; but I 
have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl than to the 
grave Men of Gondor he seemed to me, and likely to prove 
a great captain of his people when his time came. But we 
have had no word of this grief out of Gondor. When did he 
fall?¡¯ 

¡®It is now the fourth day since he was slain,¡¯ answered 
Aragorn; ¡®and since the evening of that day we have jour- 
neyed from the shadow of Tol Brandir.¡¯ 

¡®On foot?¡¯ cried Eomer. 

¡®Yes, even as you see us.¡¯ 

Wide wonder came into Eomer¡¯s eyes. ¡®Strider is too poor 
a name, son of Arathorn,¡¯ he said. ¡®Wingfoot I name you. 
This deed of the three friends should be sung in many a hall. 
Forty leagues and five you have measured ere the fourth day 
is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil! 

¡®But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return 
in haste to Theoden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true 
that we are not yet at open war with the Black Land, and 
there are some, close to the king¡¯s ear, that speak craven 
counsels; but war is coming. We shall not forsake our old 
alliance with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: 
so say I and all who hold with me. The East-mark is my 
charge, the ward of the Third Marshal, and I have removed 
all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them beyond 
Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.¡¯ 

¡®Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?¡¯ said Gimli. 

We do not and we never have,¡¯ said Eomer with a flash of 



568 


THE TWO TOWERS 


his eyes; ¡®though it comes to my ears that that lie has been 
told. Some years ago the Lord of the Black Land wished to 
purchase horses of us at great price, but we refused him, for 
he puts beasts to evil use. Then he sent plundering Ores, and 
they carry off what they can, choosing always the black 
horses: few of these are now left. For that reason our feud 
with the Ores is bitter. 

¡®But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman. He 
has claimed lordship over all this land, and there has been 
war between us for many months. He has taken Ores into his 
service, and Wolf-riders, and evil Men, and he has closed the 
Gap against us, so that we are likely to be beset both east and 
west. 

¡®It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning 
and dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and 
there, they say, as an old man hooded and cloaked, very like 
to Gandalf, as many now recall. His spies slip through every 
net, and his birds of ill omen are abroad in the sky. I do not 
know how it will all end, and my heart misgives me; for it 
seems to me that his friends do not all dwell in Isengard. But 
if you come to the king¡¯s house, you shall see for yourself. 
Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been 
sent to me for a help in doubt and need?¡¯ 

¡®I will come when I may,¡¯ said Aragorn. 

¡®Come now!¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®The Heir of Elendil would be a 
strength indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is 
battle even now upon the Westemnet, and I fear that it may 
go ill for us. 

¡®Indeed in this riding north I went without the king¡¯s leave, 
for in my absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts 
warned me of the ore-host coming down out of the East Wall 
four nights ago, and among them they reported that some 
bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what I most 
fear, a league between Orthanc and the Dark Tower, I led 
forth my eored, men of my own household; and we overtook 
the Ores at nightfall two days ago, near to the borders of 
the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and gave battle 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


569 


yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men I lost, and twelve 
horses alas! For the Ores were greater in number than we 
counted on. Others joined them, coming out of the East 
across the Great River: their trail is plain to see a little north 
of this spot. And others, too, came out of the forest. Great 
Ores, who also bore the White Eland of Isengard: that kind 
is stronger and more fell than all others. 

¡®Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too 
long away. We are needed south and west. Will you not 
come? There are spare horses as you see. There is work for 
the Sword to do. Yes, and we could find a use for Gimli¡¯s 
axe and the bow of Legolas, if they will pardon my rash 
words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do 
all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.¡¯ 

¡®I thank you for your fair words,¡¯ said Aragorn, ¡®and my 
heart desires to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends 
while hope remains.¡¯ 

¡®Hope does not remain,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®You will not find 
your friends on the North-borders.¡¯ 

¡®Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token 
not far from the East Wall that one at least of them was still 
alive there. But between the wall and the downs we have 
found no other trace of them, and no trail has turned aside, 
this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.¡¯ 

¡®Then what do you think has become of them?¡¯ 

¡®I do not know. They may have been slain and burned 
among the Ores; but that you will say cannot be, and I do 
not fear it. I can only think that they were carried off into the 
forest before the battle, even before you encircled your foes, 
maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such a 
way?¡¯ 

¡®I would swear that no Ore escaped after we sighted them,¡¯ 
said Eomer. We reached the forest-eaves before them, and 
if after that any living thing broke through our ring, then it 
was no Ore and had some Elvish power. ¡¯ 

¡®Our friends were attired even as we are,¡¯ said Aragorn; 
¡®and you passed us by under the full light of day.¡¯ 



570 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®I had forgotten that,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®It is hard to be sure of 
anything among so many marvels. The world is all grown 
strange. Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields; 
and folk speak with the Lady of the Wood and yet live; and 
the Sword comes back to war that was broken in the long 
ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark! How 
shall a man judge what to do in such times?¡¯ 

¡®As he ever has judged,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®Good and ill have 
not changed since yesteryear; nor are they one thing among 
Elves and Dwarves and another among Men. It is a man¡¯s 
part to discern them, as much in the Golden Wood as in his 
own house.¡¯ 

¡®True indeed,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®But I do not doubt you, nor 
the deed which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do 
all as I would. It is against our law to let strangers wander at 
will in our land, until the king himself shall give them leave, 
and more strict is the command in these days of peril. I have 
begged you to come back willingly with me, and you will not. 
Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.¡¯ 

¡®I do not think your law was made for such a chance,¡¯ said 
Aragorn. ¡®Nor indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this 
land before, more than once, and ridden with the host of the 
Rohirrim, though under other name and in other guise. You 
I have not seen before, for you are young, but I have spoken 
with Eomund your father, and with Theoden son of Thengel. 
Never in former days would any high lord of this land have 
constrained a man to abandon such a quest as mine. My duty 
at least is clear, to go on. Come now, son of Eomund, the 
choice must be made at last. Aid us, or at the worst let us go 
free. Or seek to carry out your law. If you do so there will be 
fewer to return to your war or to your king.¡¯ 

Eomer was silent for a moment, then he spoke. We both 
have need of haste,¡¯ he said. ¡®My company chafes to be away, 
and every hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You 
may go; and what is more, I will lend you horses. This only 
I ask: when your quest is achieved, or is proved vain, return 
with the horses over the Entwade to Meduseld, the high 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


571 


house in Edoras where Theoden now sits. Thus you shall 
prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I place myself, 
and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good faith. 
Do not fail.¡¯ 

¡®I will not,¡¯ said Aragorn. 

There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful 
glances, among his men, when Eomer gave orders that the 
spare horses were to be lent to the strangers; but only Eothain 
dared to speak openly. 

¡®It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, 
as he claims,¡¯ he said, ¡®but who has heard of a horse of the 
Mark being given to a Dwarf?¡¯ 

¡®No one,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®And do not trouble: no one will ever 
hear of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any 
beast so great, free or begrudged.¡¯ 

¡®But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,¡¯ said 
Aragorn. 

¡®Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli,¡¯ said Legolas. 
¡®Then all will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse 
nor be troubled by one.¡¯ 

A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he 
mounted it. ¡®Hasufel is his name,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®May he bear 
you well and to better fortune than Garulf, his late master!¡¯ 

A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and fiery, was 
brought to Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked 
them to take off saddle and rein. ¡®I need them not,¡¯ he said, 
and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder Arod was tame 
and willing beneath him, moving here and there with but a 
spoken word: such was the Elvish way with all good beasts. 
Gimli was lifted up behind his friend, and he clung to him, 
not much more at ease than Sam Gamgee in a boat. 

¡®Farewell, and may you find what you seek!¡¯ cried Eomer. 
¡®Return with what speed you may, and let our swords here- 
after shine together!¡¯ 

¡®I will come,¡¯ said Aragorn. 

¡®And I will come, too,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®The matter of the Lady 



572 


THE TWO TOWERS 


Galadriel lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle 
speech.¡¯ 

¡®We shall see,¡¯ said Eomer. ¡®So many strange things have 
chanced that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving 
strokes of a Dwarf¡¯s axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!¡¯ 

With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. 
When after a little Gimli looked back, the company of Eomer 
were already small and far away. Aragorn did not look back: 
he was watching the trail as they sped on their way, bending 
low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long 
they came to the borders of the Entwash, and there they met 
the other trail of which Eomer had spoken, coming down 
from the East out of the Wold. 

Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then leap- 
ing back into the saddle, he rode away for some distance 
eastward, keeping to one side and taking care not to override 
the footprints. Then he again dismounted and examined the 
ground, going backwards and forwards on foot. 

¡®There is little to discover,¡¯ he said when he returned. ¡®The 
main trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen 
as they came back; their outward course must have lain nearer 
the river. But this eastward trail is fresh and clear. There is 
no sign there of any feet going the other way, back towards 
Anduin. Now we must ride slower, and make sure that no 
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Ores must 
have been aware from this point that they were pursued; they 
may have made some attempt to get their captives away 
before they were overtaken.¡¯ 

As they rode forward the day was overcast. Low grey 
clouds came over the Wold. A mist shrouded the sun. Ever 
nearer the tree-clad slopes of Fangorn loomed, slowly dark- 
ling as the sun went west. They saw no sign of any trail to 
right or left, but here and there they passed single Ores, fallen 
in their tracks as they ran, with grey-feathered arrows sticking 
in back or throat. 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


573 


At last as the afternoon was waning they came to the eaves 
of the forest, and in an open glade among the first trees they 
found the place of the great burning: the ashes were still hot 
and smoking. Beside it was a great pile of helms and mail, 
cloven shields, and broken swords, bows and darts and other 
gear of war. Upon a stake in the middle was set a great goblin 
head; upon its shattered helm the white badge could still be 
seen. Further away, not far from the river, where it came 
streaming out from the edge of the wood, there was a mound. 
It was newly raised: the raw earth was covered with fresh-cut 
turves: about it were planted fifteen spears. 

Aragorn and his companions searched far and wide about 
the field of battle, but the light faded, and evening soon drew 
down, dim and misty. By nightfall they had discovered no 
trace of Merry and Pippin. 

¡®We can do no more,¡¯ said Gimli sadly. We have been set 
many riddles since we came to Tol Brandir, but this is the 
hardest to unravel. I would guess that the burned bones of 
the hobbits are now mingled with the Ores¡¯. It will be hard 
news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the 
old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their 
coming.¡¯ 

¡®But Gandalf was not,¡¯ said Legolas. 

¡®But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first 
to be lost,¡¯ answered Gimli. ¡®His foresight failed him.¡¯ 

¡®The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowl- 
edge of safety, for himself or for others,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®There 
are some things that it is better to begin than to refuse, even 
though the end may be dark. But I shall not depart from this 
place yet. In any case we must here await the morning-light.¡¯ 

A little way beyond the battle-field they made their camp 
under a spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it 
still bore many broad brown leaves of a former year, like dry 
hands with long splayed fingers; they rattled mournfully in 
the night-breeze. 

Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 



574 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®Let us light a fire,¡¯ he said. ¡®I care no longer for the danger. 
Let the Ores come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!¡¯ 
¡®If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might 
draw them hither,¡¯ said Legolas. 

¡®And it might draw other things, neither Ore nor Hobbit,¡¯ 
said Aragorn. ¡®We are near to the mountain-marches of the 
traitor Saruman. Also we are on the very edge of Fangorn, 
and it is perilous to touch the trees of that wood, it is said.¡¯ 
¡®But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,¡¯ 
said Gimli, ¡®and they fehed trees for the fire, as can be seen. 
Yet they passed the night after safely here, when their labour 
was ended.¡¯ 

¡®They were many,¡¯ said Aragorn, ¡®and they do not heed 
the wrath of Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they 
do not go under the trees. But our paths are likely to lead us 
into the very forest itself. So have a care! Cut no living wood!¡¯ 
¡®There is no need,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®The Riders have left chip 
and bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.¡¯ 
He went off to gather fuel, and busied himself with building 
and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent with his back to the 
great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in the 
open, looking towards the profound shadow of the wood, 
leaning forward, as one who listens to voices calling from a 
distance. 

When the Dwarf had a smah bright blaze going, the three 
companions drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the 
light with their hooded forms. Legolas looked up at the 
boughs of the tree reaching out above them. 

¡®Look!¡¯ he said. ¡®The tree is glad of the fire!¡¯ 

It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their 
eyes, but certainly to each of the companions the boughs 
appeared to be bending this way and that so as to come above 
the flames, while the upper branches were stooping down; 
the brown leaves now stood out stiff, and rubbed together 
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth. 

There was a silence, for suddenly the dark and unknown 
forest, so near at hand, made itself felt as a great brooding 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 575 

presence, full of secret purpose. After a while Legolas spoke 
again. 

¡®Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,¡¯ he said. 
¡®Do you know why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the 
forest that Boromir had heard?¡¯ 

¡®I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere,¡¯ said 
Aragorn, ¡®but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I 
should deem them only fables that Men have made as true 
knowledge fades. I had thought of asking you what was the 
truth of the matter. And if an Elf of the wood does not know, 
how shall a Man answer?¡¯ 

¡®You have journeyed further than I,¡¯ said Legolas. ¡®I have 
heard nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that 
tell how the Onodrim, that Men call Ents, dwelt there long 
ago; for Fangorn is old, old even as the Elves would reckon 

it.¡¯ 

¡®Yes, it is old,¡¯ said Aragorn, ¡®as old as the forest by the 
Barrow-downs, and it is far greater. Elrond says that the two 
are akin, the last strongholds of the mighty woods of the 
Elder Days, in which the Firstborn roamed while Men still 
slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its own. What it is I 
do not know.¡¯ 

¡®And I do not wish to know,¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®Let nothing that 
dwells in Fangorn be troubled on my account!¡¯ 

They now drew lots for the watches, and the lot for the 
first watch fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at 
once sleep laid hold on them. ¡®Gimli!¡¯ said Aragorn drowsily. 
¡®Remember, it is perilous to cut bough or twig from a living 
tree in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead wood. 
Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!¡¯ 

With that he fell asleep. Legolas already lay motionless, his 
fair hands folded upon his breast, his eyes unclosed, blending 
living night and deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli 
sat hunched by the fire, running his thumb thoughtfully along 
the edge of his axe. The tree rustled. There was no other 
sound. 

Suddenly Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of 



576 


THE TWO TOWERS 


the firelight stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and 
wrapped in a great cloak; his wide-brimmed hat was pulled 
down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too amazed for the 
moment to cry out, though at once the thought flashed into 
his mind that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and 
Legolas, roused by his sudden movement, sat up and stared. 
The old man did not speak or make a sign. 

¡®Well, father, what can we do for you?¡¯ said Aragorn, leap- 
ing to his feet. ¡®Come and be warm, if you are cold!¡¯ He 
strode forward, but the old man was gone. There was no 
trace of him to be found near at hand, and they did not dare 
to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very 
dark. 

Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. ¡®The horses! The horses!¡¯ 

The horses were gone. They had dragged their pickets and 
disappeared. For some time the three companions stood still 
and silent, troubled by this new stroke of ill fortune. They 
were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless leagues lay 
between them and the Men of Rohan, their only friends in 
this wide and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to 
them that they heard, far off in the night, the sound of horses 
whinnying and neighing. Then all was quiet again, except for 
the cold rustle of the wind. 

¡®Well, they are gone,¡¯ said Aragorn at last. We cannot find 
them or catch them; so that if they do not return of their own 
will, we must do without. We started on our feet, and we 
have those still.¡¯ 

¡®Feet!¡¯ said Gimli. ¡®But we cannot eat them as well as walk 
on them.¡¯ He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down 
beside it. 

¡®Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse 
of Rohan,¡¯ laughed Legolas. ¡®You will make a rider yet.¡¯ 

¡®It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,¡¯ said Gimli. 

¡®If you wish to know what I think,¡¯ he began again after a 
while, ¡®I think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember the 
words of Eomer: he walks about like an old man hooded and 



THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 


577 


cloaked. Those were the words. He has gone off with our 
horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more 
trouble coming to us, mark my words!¡¯ 

¡®I mark them,¡¯ said Aragorn. ¡®But I marked also that this 
old man had a hat not a hood. Still I do not doubt that you 
guess right, and that we are in peril here, by night or day. 
Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we can do but rest, 
while we may. I will watch for a while now, Gimli. I have 
more need of thought than of sleep.¡¯ 

The night passed slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and 
Gimli followed Legolas, and their watches wore away. But 
nothing happened. The old man did not appear again, and 
the horses did not return. 



Chapter 3 


THE URUK-HAI 


Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream: it seemed that he 
could hear his own small voice echoing in black tunnels, 
calling Frodo, Frodo! But instead of Frodo hundreds of hid- 
eous orc-faces grinned at him out of the shadows, hundreds 
of hideous arms grasped at him from every side. Where was 
Merry? 

He woke. Cold air blew on his face. He was lying on his 
back. Evening was coming and the sky above was growing 
dim. He turned and found that the dream was little worse 
than the waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were tied with 
cords. Beside him Merry lay, white-faced, with a dirty rag 
bound across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great 
company of Ores. 

Slowly in Pippin¡¯s aching head memory pieced itself 
together and became separated from dream-shadows. Of 
course: he and Merry had run off into the woods. What had 
come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking 
no notice of old Strider? They had run a long way shouting 
- he could not remember how far or how long; and then 
suddenly they had crashed right into a group of Ores: they 
were standing listening, and they did not appear to see Merry 
and Pippin until they were almost in their arms. Then they 
yelled and dozens of other goblins had sprung out of the 
trees. Merry and he had drawn their swords, but the Ores 
did not wish to fight, and had tried only to lay hold of them, 
even when Merry had cut off several of their arms and hands. 
Good old Merry! 

Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees. He had 
made them fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled. 
But they had not gone far on the way back when they were 


THE URUK-HAI 


579 


attacked again, by a hundred Ores at least, some of them 
very large, and they shot a rain of arrows: always at Boromir. 
Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang, and at 
first the Ores had been dismayed and had drawn back; but 
when no answer but the echoes came, they had attacked more 
fiercely than ever. Pippin did not remember much more. His 
last memory was of Boromir leaning against a tree, plucking 
out an arrow; then darkness fell suddenly. 

¡®I suppose I was knocked on the head,¡¯ he said to himself. 
¡®I wonder if poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened 
to Boromir? Why didn¡¯t the Ores kill us? Where are we, and 
where are we going?¡¯ 

He could not answer the questions. He felt cold and 
sick. ¡®I wish Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us 
come,¡¯ he thought. ¡®What good have I been? Just a nuisance: 
a passenger, a piece of luggage. And now I have been stolen 
and I am just a piece of luggage for the Ores. I hope Strider 
or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope 
for it? Won¡¯t that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get 
free!¡¯ 

He struggled a little, quite uselessly. One of the Ores sitting 
near laughed and said something to a companion in their 
abominable tongue. ¡®Rest while you can, little fool!¡¯ he said 
then to Pippin, in the Common Speech, which he made 
almost as hideous as his own language. ¡®Rest while you can! 
We¡¯ll find a use for your legs before long. You¡¯ll wish you 
had got none before we get home.¡¯ 

¡®If I had my way, you¡¯d wish you were dead now,¡¯ said the 
other. ¡®I¡¯d make you squeak, you miserable rat.¡¯ He stooped 
over Pippin, bringing his yellow fangs close to his face. He 
had a black knife with a long jagged blade in his hand. ¡®Lie 
quiet, or I¡¯ll tickle you with this,¡¯ he hissed. ¡®Don¡¯t draw 
attention to yourself, or I may forget my orders. Curse the 
Isengarders! Ugliik u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman-glob bub- 
hosh skat\ he passed into a long angry speech in his own 
tongue that slowly died away into muttering and snarling. 



580 


THE TWO TOWERS 


Terrified Pippin lay still, though the pain at his wrists and 
ankles was growing, and the stones beneath him were boring 
into his back. To take his mind off himself he listened intently 
to all that he could hear. There were many voices round 
about, and though orc-speech sounded at all times full of 
hate and anger, it seemed plain that something like a quarrel 
had begun, and was getting hotter. 

To Pippin¡¯s surprise he found that much of the talk was 
intelligible; many of the Ores were using ordinary language. 
Apparently the members of two or three quite different tribes 
were present, and they could not understand one another¡¯s 
orc-speech. There was an angry debate concerning what they 
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should 
be done with the prisoners. 

¡®There¡¯s no time to kill them properly,¡¯ said one. ¡®No time 
for play on this trip.¡¯ 

¡®That can¡¯t be helped,¡¯ said another. ¡®But why not kill them 
quick, kill them now? They¡¯re a cursed nuisance, and we¡¯re 
in a hurry. Evening¡¯s coming on, and we ought to get a move 
on.¡¯ 

¡®Orders,¡¯ said a third voice in a deep growl. ¡® Kill all but 
NOT the Halflings; they are to be brought back alive as quickly 
as possible. That¡¯s my orders.¡¯ 

¡®What are they wanted for?¡¯ asked several voices. ¡®Why 
alive? Do they give good sport?¡¯ 

¡®No! I heard that one of them has got something, something 
that¡¯s wanted for the War, some Elvish plot or other. Anyway 
they¡¯ll both be questioned.¡¯ 

¡®Is that all you know? Why don¡¯t we search them and find 
out? We might find something that we could use ourselves.¡¯ 

¡®That is a very interesting remark,¡¯ sneered a voice, softer 
than the others but more evil. ¡®I may have to report that. The 
prisoners are not to be searched or plundered: those are my 
orders.¡¯ 

¡®And mine too,¡¯ said the deep voice. 'Alive and as captured; 
no spoiling. That¡¯s my orders.¡¯ 

¡®Not our orders!¡¯ said one of the earlier voices. We have 



THE URUK-HAI 581 

come all the way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. 
I wish to kill, and then go back north.¡¯ 

¡®Then you can wish again,¡¯ said the growling voice. ¡®I am 
Ugluk. I command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.¡¯ 
¡®Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye?¡¯ said the evil 
voice. ¡®We should go back at once to Lugburz.¡¯ 

¡®If we could cross the Great River, we might,¡¯ said another 
voice. ¡®But there are not enough of us to venture down to the 
bridges.¡¯ 

¡®I came across,¡¯ said the evil voice. ¡®A winged Nazgul awaits 
us northward on the east-bank.¡¯ 

¡®Maybe, maybe! Then you¡¯ll fly off with our prisoners, and 
get all the pay and praise in Lugburz, and leave us to foot it 
as best we can through the Horse-country. No, we must stick 
together. These lands are dangerous: full of foul rebels and 
brigands.¡¯ 

¡®Aye, we must stick together,¡¯ growled Ugluk. ¡®I don¡¯t trust 
you little swine. You¡¯ve no guts outside your own sties. But 
for us you¡¯d all have run away. We are the fighting Uruk-hai! 
We slew the great warrior. We took the prisoners. We are the 
servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand 
that gives us man¡¯s-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, 
and led you here, and we shall lead you back by the way we 
choose. I am Ugluk. I have spoken.¡¯ 

¡®You have spoken more than enough, Ugluk,¡¯ sneered the 
evil voice. ¡®I wonder how they would like it in Lugburz. 
They might think that Ugluk¡¯ s shoulders needed relieving of 
a swollen head. They might ask where his strange ideas came 
from. Did they come from Saruman, perhaps? Who does he 
think he is, setting up on his own with his filthy white badges? 
They might agree with me, with Grishnakh their trusted 
messenger; and I Grishnakh say this: Saruman is a fool, and 
a dirty treacherous fool. But the Great Eye is on him. 

¡® Swine is it? How do you folk like being called swine by the 
muck-rakers of a dirty little wizard? It¡¯s orc-flesh they eat, I¡¯ll 
warrant.¡¯ 

Many loud yells in orc-speech answered him, and the 



582 


THE TWO TOWERS 


ringing clash of weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin 
rolled over, hoping to see what would happen. His guards 
had gone to join in the fray. In the twilight he saw a large 
black Ore, probably Ugluk, standing facing Grishnakh, a 
short crook-legged creature, very broad and with long arms 
that hung almost to the ground. Round them were many 
smaller goblins. Pippin supposed that these were the ones 
from the North. They had drawn their knives and swords, 
but hesitated to attack Ugluk. 

Ugluk shouted, and a number of other Ores of nearly his 
own size ran up. Then suddenly, without warning, Ugluk 
sprang forwards, and with two swift strokes swept the heads 
off two of his opponents. Grishnakh stepped aside and 
vanished into the shadows. The others gave way, and one 
stepped backwards and fell over Merry¡¯s prostrate form with 
a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Ugluk¡¯s followers 
leaped over him and cut down another with their broad- 
bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged guard. His body fell 
right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife. 

¡®Put up your weapons!¡¯ shouted Ugluk. ¡®And let¡¯s have no 
more nonsense! We go straight west from here, and down 
the stair. From there straight to the downs, then along the 
river to the forest. And we march day and night. That clear?¡¯ 

¡®Now,¡¯ thought Pippin, ¡®if only it takes that ugly fellow a 
little while to get his troop under control, I¡¯ve got a chance.¡¯ 
A gleam of hope had come to him. The edge of the black 
knife had snicked his arm, and then slid down to his wrist. 
He felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he also felt the 
cold touch of steel against his skin. 

The Ores were getting ready to march again, but some of 
the Northerners were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew 
two more before the rest were cowed. There was much curs- 
ing and confusion. For the moment Pippin was unwatched. 
His legs were securely bound, but his arms were only bed 
about the wrists, and his hands were in front of him. He 
could move them both together, though the bonds were 
cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Ore to one side, then hardly 



THE URUK-HAI 


583 


daring to breathe, he drew the knot of the wrist-cord up and 
down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the 
dead hand held it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin 
took it in his fingers and knotted it again into a loose bracelet 
of two loops and slipped it over his hands. Then he lay very 
still. 

¡®Pick up those prisoners!¡¯ shouted Ugluk. ¡®Don¡¯t play any 
tricks with them! If they are not alive when we get back, 
someone else will die too.¡¯ 

An Ore seized Pippin like a sack, put its head between his 
tied hands, grabbed his arms and dragged them down, until 
Pippin¡¯s face was crushed against its neck; then it jolted off 
with him. Another treated Merry in the same way. The Ore¡¯s 
clawlike hand gripped Pippin¡¯s arms like iron; the nails bit 
into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams. 

Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It 
was early night, but the slim moon was already falling west- 
ward. They were on the edge of a cliff that seemed to look 
out over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of water falling 
nearby. 

¡®The scouts have come back at last,¡¯ said an Ore close at 
hand. 

¡®Well, what did you discover?¡¯ growled the voice of Ugluk. 

¡®Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All¡¯s 
clear now.¡¯ 

¡®Now, I daresay. But how long? You fools! You should 
have shot him. He¡¯ll raise the alarm. The cursed horse- 
breeders will hear of us by morning. Now we¡¯ll have to leg it 
double quick.¡¯ 

A shadow bent over Pippin. It was Ugluk. ¡®Sit up!¡¯ said the 
Ore. ¡®My lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to 
climb down, and you must use your legs. Be helpful now. 
No crying out, no trying to escape. We have ways of paying 
for tricks that you won¡¯t like, though they won¡¯t spoil your 
usefulness for the Master.¡¯ 

He cut the thongs round Pippin¡¯s legs and ankles, picked 



584 


THE TWO TOWERS 


him up by his hair and stood him on his feet. Pippin fell 
down, and Ugluk dragged him up by his hair again. Several 
Ores laughed. Ugluk thrust a flask between his teeth and 
poured some burning liquid down his throat: he felt a hot 
fierce glow flow through him. The pain in his legs and ankles 
vanished. He could stand. 

¡®Now for the other!¡¯ said Ugluk. Pippin saw him go to 
Merry, who was lying close by, and kick him. Merry groaned. 
Seizing him roughly Ugluk pulled him into a sitting position, 
and tore the bandage off his head. Then he smeared the 
wound with some dark stuff out of a small wooden box. 
Merry cried out and struggled wildly. 

The Ores clapped and hooted. ¡®Can¡¯t take his medicine,¡¯ 
they jeered. ¡®Doesn¡¯t know what¡¯s good for him. Ai! We shall 
have some fun later.¡¯ 

But at the moment Ugluk was not engaged in sport. He 
needed speed and had to humour unwilling followers. He 
was healing Merry in ore-fashion; and his treatment worked 
swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down the 
hobbit¡¯s throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to his 
feet, Merry stood up, looking pale but grim and defiant, and 
very much alive. The gash in his forehead gave him no more 
trouble, but he bore a brown scar to the end of his days. 

¡®Hullo, Pippin!¡¯ he said. ¡®So you¡¯ve come on this little 
expedition, too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?¡¯ 

¡®Now then!¡¯ said Ugluk. ¡®None of that! Hold your tongues. 
No talk to one another. Any trouble will be reported at the 
other end, and He¡¯ll know how to pay you. You¡¯ll get bed 
and breakfast all right: more than you can stomach.¡¯ 

The ore -band began to descend a narrow ravine leading 
down into the misty plain below. Merry and Pippin, separ- 
ated by a dozen Ores or more, climbed down with them. At 
the bottom they stepped on to grass, and the hearts of the 
hobbits rose. 

¡®Now straight on!¡¯ shouted Ugluk. West and a little north. 
Follow Lugdush.¡¯ 



THE URUK-HAI 585 

¡®But what are we going to do at sunrise?¡¯ said some of the 
Northerners. 

¡®Go on running,¡¯ said Ugluk. ¡®What do you think? Sit on 
the grass and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?¡¯ 

¡®But we can¡¯t run in the sunlight.¡¯ 

¡®You¡¯ll run with me behind you,¡¯ said Ugluk. ¡®Run! Or 
you¡¯ll never see your beloved holes again. By the White Hand! 
What¡¯s the use of sending out mountain-maggots on a trip, 
only half trained. Run, curse you! Run while night lasts!¡¯ 

Then the whole company began to run with the long loping 
strides of Ores. They kept no order, thrusting, jostling, and 
cursing; yet their speed was very great. Each hobbit had a 
guard of three. Pippin was far back in the line. He wondered 
how long he would be able to go on at this pace: he had had 
no food since the morning. One of his guards had a whip. 
But at present the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, 
too, were wide-awake. 

Every now and again there came into his mind unbidden 
a vision of the keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, 
and running, running behind. But what could even a Ranger 
see except a confused trail of orc-feet? His own little prints 
and Merry¡¯s were overwhelmed by the trampling of the iron- 
shod shoes before them and behind them and about them. 

They had gone only a mile or so from the cliff when the 
land sloped down into a wide shallow depression, where the 
ground was soft and wet. Mist lay there, pale-glimmering in 
the last rays of the sickle moon. The dark shapes of the Ores 
in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up. 

¡®Ai! Steady now!¡¯ shouted Ugluk from the rear. 

A sudden thought leaped into Pippin¡¯s mind, and he acted 
on it at once. He swerved aside to the right, and dived out of 
the reach of his clutching guard, headfirst into the mist; he 
landed sprawling on the grass. 

¡®Halt!¡¯ yelled Ugluk. 

There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin 
sprang up and ran. But the Ores were after him. Some 
suddenly loomed up right in front of him. 



586 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®No hope of escape!¡¯ thought Pippin. ¡®But there is a hope 
that I have left some of my own marks unspoilt on the wet 
ground.¡¯ He groped with his two tied hands at his throat, and 
unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as long arms and hard 
claws seized him, he let it fall. ¡®There I suppose it will lie until 
the end of time,¡¯ he thought. ¡®I don¡¯t know why I did it. 
If the others have escaped, they¡¯ve probably all gone with 
Frodo.¡¯ 

A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry. 

¡®Enough!¡¯ shouted Ugluk running up. ¡®He¡¯s still got to run 
a long way yet. Make ¡¯em both run! Just use the whip as a 
reminder.¡¯ 

¡®But that¡¯s not all,¡¯ he snarled, turning to Pippin. ¡®I shan¡¯t 
forget. Payment is only put off. Leg it!¡¯ 

Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the later 
part of the journey. Evil dreams and evil waking were blended 
into a long tunnel of misery, with hope growing ever fainter 
behind. They ran, and they ran, striving to keep up the pace 
set by the Ores, licked every now and again with a cruel 
thong cunningly handled. If they halted or stumbled, they 
were seized and dragged for some distance. 

The warmth of the ore-draught had gone. Pippin felt cold 
and sick again. Suddenly he fell face downward on the turf. 
Hard hands with rending nails gripped and lifted him. He 
was carried like a sack once more, and darkness grew about 
him: whether the darkness of another night, or a blindness of 
his eyes, he could not tell. 

Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed 
that many of the Ores were demanding a halt. Ugluk was 
shouting. He felt himself flung to the ground, and he lay as 
he fell, till black dreams took him. But he did not long escape 
from pain; soon the iron grip of merciless hands was on him 
again. For a long time he was tossed and shaken, and then 
slowly the darkness gave way, and he came back to the waking 
world and found that it was morning. Orders were shouted 
and he was thrown roughly on the grass. 



THE URUK-HAI 


587 


There he lay for a while, fighting with despair. His head 
swam, but from the heat in his body he guessed that he had 
been given another draught. An Ore stooped over him, and 
flung him some bread and a strip of raw dried flesh. He ate 
the stale grey bread hungrily, but not the meat. He was fam- 
ished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by 
an Ore, the flesh of he dared not guess what creature. 

He sat up and looked about. Merry was not far away. They 
were by the banks of a swift narrow river. Ahead mountains 
loomed: a tall peak was catching the first rays of the sun. A 
dark smudge of forest lay on the lower slopes before them. 

There was much shouting and debating among the Ores; 
a quarrel seemed on the point of breaking out again between 
the Northerners and the Isengarders. Some were pointing 
back away south, and some were pointing eastward. 

¡®Very well,¡¯ said Ugluk. ¡®Leave them to me then! No killing, 
as I¡¯ve told you before; but if you want to throw away what 
we¡¯ve come all the way to get, throw it away! I¡¯ll look after it. 
Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the work, as usual. If you¡¯re 
afraid of the Whiteskins, run! Run! There¡¯s the forest,¡¯ he 
shouted, pointing ahead. ¡®Get to it! It¡¯s your best hope. Off 
you go! And quick, before I knock a few more heads off, to 
put some sense into the others.¡¯ 

There was some cursing and scuffling, and then most of 
the Northerners broke away and dashed off, over a hundred 
of them, running wildly along the river towards the moun- 
tains. The hobbits were left with the Isengarders: a grim dark 
band, four score at least of large, swart, slant-eyed Ores with 
great bows and short broad-bladed swords. A few of the 
larger and bolder Northerners remained with them. 

¡®Now we¡¯ll deal with Grishnakh,¡¯ said Ugluk; but some 
even of his own followers were looking uneasily southwards. 

¡®I know,¡¯ growled Ugluk. ¡®The cursed horse-boys have got 
wind of us. But that¡¯s all your fault, Snaga. You and the other 
scouts ought to have your ears cut off. But we are the fighters. 
We¡¯ll feast on horseflesh yet, or something better.¡¯ 

At that moment Pippin saw why some of the troop had 



588 


THE TWO TOWERS 


been pointing eastward. From that direction there now came 
hoarse cries, and there was Grishnakh again, and at his back 
a couple of score of others like him: long-armed crook-legged 
Ores. They had a red eye painted on their shields. Ugluk 
stepped forward to meet them. 

¡®So you¡¯ve come back?¡¯ he said. ¡®Thought better of it, eh?¡¯ 
¡®I¡¯ve returned to see that Orders are carried out and the 
prisoners safe,¡¯ answered Grishnakh. 

¡®Indeed!¡¯ said Ugluk. ¡®Waste of effort. I¡¯ll see that orders 
are carried out in my command. And what else did you 
come back for? You went in a hurry. Did you leave anything 
behind?¡¯ 

¡®I left a fool,¡¯ snarled Grishnakh. ¡®But there were some 
stout fellows with him that are too good to lose. I knew you¡¯d 
lead them into a mess. I¡¯ve come to help them.¡¯ 

¡®Splendid!¡¯ laughed Ugluk. ¡®But unless you¡¯ve got some 
guts for fighting, you¡¯ve taken the wrong way. Lugburz was 
your road. The Whiteskins are coming. What¡¯s happened to 
your precious Nazgul? Has he had another mount shot under 
him? Now, if you¡¯d brought him along, that might have been 
useful - if these Nazgul are all they make out.¡¯ 

¡® Nazgul , Nazgul ,¡¯ said Grishnakh, shivering and licking 
his lips, as if the word had a foul taste that he savoured pain- 
fully. ¡®You speak of what is deep beyond the reach of your 
muddy dreams, Ugluk,¡¯ he said. ¡® Nazgul 7 Ah! All that they 
make out! One day you¡¯ll wish that you had not said that. 
Ape!¡¯ he snarled fiercely. ¡®You ought to know that they¡¯re the 
apple of the Great Eye. But the winged Nazgul: not yet, not 
yet. He won¡¯t let them show themselves across the Great 
River yet, not too soon. They¡¯re for the War - and other 
purposes.¡¯ 

¡®You seem to know a lot,¡¯ said Ugluk. ¡®More than is good 
for you, I guess. Perhaps those in Lugburz might wonder 
how, and why. But in the meantime the Uruk-hai of Isengard 
can do the dirty work, as usual. Don¡¯t stand slavering there! 
Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging it to 
the forest. You¡¯d better follow. You wouldn¡¯t get back to the 



THE URUK-HAI 589 

Great River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I¡¯ll be on your 
heels.¡¯ 

The Isengarders seized Merry and Pippin again and slung 
them on their backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after 
hour they ran, pausing now and again only to sling the hobbits 
to fresh carriers. Either because they were quicker and hard- 
ier, or because of some plan of Grishnakh¡¯s, the Isengarders 
gradually passed through the Ores of Mordor, and Grish- 
nakh¡¯s folk closed in behind. Soon they were gaining also on 
the Northerners ahead. The forest began to draw nearer. 

Pippin was bruised and torn, his aching head was grated 
by the filthy jowl and hairy ear of the Ore that held him. 
Immediately in front were bowed backs, and tough thick legs 
going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if they were 
made of wire and horn, beating out the nightmare seconds 
of an endless time. 

In the afternoon Ugluk¡¯s troop overtook the Northerners. 
They were flagging in the rays of the bright sun, winter sun 
shining in a pale cool sky though it was; their heads were 
down and their tongues lolling out. 

¡®Maggots!¡¯ jeered the Isengarders. ¡®You¡¯re cooked. The 
Whiteskins will catch you and eat you. They¡¯re coming!¡¯ 

A cry from Grishnakh showed that this was not mere jest. 
Horsemen, riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still 
far behind but gaining on the Ores, gaining on them like a 
tide over the flats on folk straying in a quicksand. 

The Isengarders began to run with a redoubled pace that 
astonished Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed for the end of a 
race. Then he saw that the sun was sinking, falling behind the 
Misty Mountains; shadows reached over the land. The soldiers 
of Mordor lifted their heads and also began to put on speed. 
The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a 
few outlying trees. The land was beginning to slope upwards, 
ever more steeply; but the Ores did not halt. Both Ugluk and 
Grishnakh shouted, spurring them on to a last effort. 



590 


THE TWO TOWERS 


¡®They will make it yet. They will escape,¡¯ thought Pippin. 
And then he managed to twist his neck, so as to glance back 
with one eye over his shoulder. He saw that riders away 
eastward were already level with the Ores, galloping over the 
plain. The sunset gilded their spears and helmets, and glinted 
in their pale flowing hair. They were hemming the Ores in, 
preventing them from scattering, and driving them along the 
line of the river. 

He wondered very much what kind of folk they were. He 
wished now that he had learned more in Rivendell, and 
looked more at maps and things; but in those days the plans 
for the journey seemed to be in more competent hands, and 
he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or 
from Strider, and even from Frodo. All that he could remem- 
ber about Rohan was that Gandalf ¡¯s horse, Shadowfax, had 
come from that land. That sounded hopeful, as far as it went. 

¡®But how will they know that we are not Ores?¡¯ he thought. 
¡®I don¡¯t suppose they¡¯ve ever heard of hobbits down here. I 
suppose I ought to be glad that the beastly Ores look like 
being destroyed, but I would rather be saved myself.¡¯ The 
chances were that he and Merry would be killed together with 
their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of 
them. 

A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen, skilled at 
shooting from a running horse. Riding swiftly into range they 
shot arrows at the Ores that straggled behind, and several of 
them fell; then the riders wheeled away out of the range of 
the answering bows of their enemies, who shot wildly, not 
daring to halt. This happened many times, and on one 
occasion arrows fell among the Isengarders. One of them, 
just in front of Pippin, stumbled and did not get up again. 

Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. 
Many Ores had fallen, but fully two hundred remained. In 
the early darkness the Ores came to a hillock. The eaves of 
the forest were very near, probably no more than three fur- 
longs away, but they could go no further. The horsemen had 



THE URUK-HAI 591 

encircled them. A small band disobeyed Ugluk¡¯s command, 
and ran on towards the forest: only three returned. 

¡®Well, here we are,¡¯ sneered Grishnakh. ¡®Fine leadership! I 
hope the great Ugluk will lead us out again.¡¯ 

¡®Put those Halflings down!¡¯ ordered Ugluk, taking no notice 
of Grishnakh. ¡®You, Lugdush, get two others and stand guard 
over them! They¡¯re not to be killed, unless the filthy 
Whiteskins break through. Understand? As long as I¡¯m alive, 
I want ¡¯em. But they¡¯re not to cry out, and they¡¯re not to be 
rescued. Bind their legs!¡¯ 

The last part of the order was carried out mercilessly. But 
Pippin found that for the first time he was close to Merry. 
The Ores were making a great deal of noise, shouting and 
clashing their weapons, and the hobbits managed to whisper 
together for a while. 

¡®I don¡¯t think much of this,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®I feel nearly done 
in. Don¡¯t think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.¡¯ 

'Lembas!' whispered Pippin. 'Lembas: I¡¯ve got some. Have 
you? I don¡¯t think they¡¯ve taken anything but our swords.¡¯ 

¡®Yes, I had a packet in my pocket,¡¯ answered Merry, ¡®but 
it must be battered to crumbs. Anyway I can¡¯t put my mouth 
in my pocket!¡¯ 

¡®You won¡¯t have to. I¡¯ve ¡¯; but just then a savage kick 

warned Pippin that the noise had died down, and the guards 
were watchful. 

The night was cold and still. All round the knoll on which 
the Ores were gathered little watch-fires sprang up, golden- 
red in the darkness, a complete ring of them. They were 
within a long bowshot, but the riders did not show themselves 
against the light, and the Ores wasted many arrows shooting 
at the fires, until Ugluk stopped them. The riders made no 
sound. Later in the night when the moon came out of the 
mist, then occasionally they could be seen, shadowy shapes 
that glinted now and again in the white light, as they moved 
in ceaseless patrol. 

¡®They¡¯ll wait for the Sun, curse them!¡¯ growled one of the 



592 


THE TWO TOWERS 


guards. ¡®Why don¡¯t we get together and charge through? 
What¡¯s old Ugluk think he¡¯s doing, I should like to know?¡¯ 

¡®I daresay you would,¡¯ snarled Ugluk stepping up from 
behind. ¡®Meaning I don¡¯t think at all, eh? Curse you! You¡¯re 
as bad as the other rabble: the maggots and the apes of 
Lugburz. No good trying to charge with them. They¡¯d just 
squeal and bolt, and there are more than enough of these 
filthy horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat. 

¡®There¡¯s only one thing those maggots can do: they can 
see like gimlets in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better 
night-eyes than most Men, from all I¡¯ve heard; and don¡¯t 
forget their horses! They can see the night-breeze, or so 
it¡¯s said. Still there¡¯s one thing the fine fellows don¡¯t know: 
Mauhur and his lads are in the forest, and they should turn 
up any time now.¡¯ 

Ugluk¡¯s words were enough, apparently, to satisfy the 
Isengarders; but the other Ores were both dispirited and 
rebellious. They posted a few watchers, but most of them lay 
on the ground, resting in the pleasant darkness. It did indeed 
become very dark again; for the moon passed westward into 
thick cloud, and Pippin could not see anything a few feet 
away. The fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders 
were not, however, content merely to wait for the dawn and 
let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on the east side of the 
knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that some 
of the Men had ridden in close, slipped off their horses, 
crawled to the edge of the camp and killed several Ores, 
and then had faded away again. Ugluk dashed off to stop a 
stampede. 

Pippin and Merry sat up. Their guards, Isengarders, had 
gone with Ugluk. But if the hobbits had any thought of 
escape, it was soon dashed. A long hairy arm took each of 
them by the neck and drew them close together. Dimly they 
were aware of Grishnakh¡¯s great head and hideous face 
between them; his foul breath was on their cheeks. He began 
to paw them and feel them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold 
fingers groped down his back. 



THE URUK-HAI 


593 


¡®Well, my little ones!¡¯ said Grishnakh in a soft whisper. 
¡®Enjoying your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed 
perhaps: swords and whips on one side, and nasty spears on 
the other! Little people should not meddle in affairs that are 
too big for them.¡¯ His fingers continued to grope. There was 
a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes. 

The thought came suddenly into Pippin¡¯s mind, as if 
caught direct from the urgent thought of his enemy: ¡®Grish- 
nakh knows about the Ring! He¡¯s looking for it, while Ugluk 
is busy: he probably wants it for himself.¡¯ Cold fear was in 
Pippin¡¯s heart, yet at the same time he was wondering what 
use he could make of Grishnakh¡¯s desire. 

¡®I don¡¯t think you will find it that way,¡¯ he whispered. ¡®It 
isn¡¯t easy to find.¡¯ 

¡® Find it?¡¯ said Grishnakh: his fingers stopped crawling and 
gripped Pippin¡¯s shoulder. ¡®Find what? What are you talking 
about, little one?¡¯ 

For a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the 
darkness he made a noise in his throat: gollum , gollum. ¡®Noth- 
ing, my precious,¡¯ he added. 

The hobbits felt Grishnakh¡¯s fingers twitch. ¡®O ho!¡¯ hissed 
the goblin softly. ¡®That¡¯s what he means, is it? O ho! Very 
ve-ry dangerous, my little ones.¡¯ 

¡®Perhaps,¡¯ said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin¡¯s 
guess. ¡®Perhaps; and not only for us. Still you know your own 
business best. Do you want it, or not? And what would you 
give for it?¡¯ 

¡®Do I want it? Do I want it?¡¯ said Grishnakh, as if puzzled; 
but his arms were trembling. What would I give for it? What 
do you mean?¡¯ 

We mean,¡¯ said Pippin, choosing his words carefully, ¡®that 
it¡¯s no good groping in the dark. We could save you time and 
trouble. But you must untie our legs first, or we¡¯ll do nothing, 
and say nothing.¡¯ 

¡®My dear tender little fools,¡¯ hissed Grishnakh, ¡®everything 
you have, and everything you know, will be got out of you in 
due time: everything! You¡¯ll wish there was more that you 



594 


THE TWO TOWERS 


could tell to satisfy the Questioner, indeed you will: quite 
soon. We shan¡¯t hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no! What do you 
think you¡¯ve been kept alive for? My dear little fellows, please 
believe me when I say that it was not out of kindness: that¡¯s 
not even one of Ugluk¡¯s faults.¡¯ 

¡®I find it quite easy to believe,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®But you haven¡¯t 
got your prey home yet. And it doesn¡¯t seem to be going your 
way, whatever happens. If we come to Isengard, it won¡¯t be 
the great Grishnakh that benefits: Saruman will take all that 
he can find. If you want anything for yourself, now¡¯s the time 
to do a deal.¡¯ 

Grishnakh began to lose his temper. The name of Saruman 
seemed specially to enrage him. Time was passing and the 
disturbance was dying down. Ugluk or the Isengarders might 
return at any minute. ¡®Have you got it - either of you?¡¯ he 
snarled. 

"Gollum, gollum!¡¯ said Pippin. 

¡®Untie our legs!¡¯ said Merry. 

They felt the Ore¡¯s arms trembling violently. ¡®Curse you, 
you filthy little vermin!¡¯ he hissed. ¡®Untie your legs? I¡¯ll untie 
every string in your bodies. Do you think I can¡¯t search you to 
the bones? Search you! I¡¯ll cut you both to quivering shreds. I 
don¡¯t need the help of your legs to get you away - and have 
you all to myself!¡¯ 

Suddenly he seized them. The strength in his long arms 
and shoulders was terrifying. He tucked them one under each 
armpit, and crushed them fiercely to his sides; a great stifling 
hand was clapped over each of their mouths. Then he sprang 
forward, stooping low. Quickly and silently he went, until he 
came to the edge of the knoll. There, choosing a gap between 
the watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the night, 
down the slope and away westward towards the river that 
flowed out of the forest. In that direction there was a wide 
open space with only one fire. 

After going a dozen yards he halted, peering and listening. 
Nothing could be seen or heard. He crept slowly on, bent 
almost double. Then he squatted and listened again. Then 



THE URUK-HAI 


595 


he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. At that very moment 
the dark form of a rider loomed up right in front of him. A 
horse snorted and reared. A man called out. 

Grishnakh flung himself on the ground flat, dragging the 
hobbits under him; then he drew his sword. No doubt he 
meant to kill his captives, rather than allow them to escape 
or to be rescued; but it was his undoing. The sword rang 
faintly, and glinted a little in the light of the fire away to his 
left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed 
with skill, or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He 
dropped the sword and shrieked. There was a quick beat of 
hoofs, and even as Grishnakh leaped up and ran, he was 
ridden down and a spear passed through him. He gave a 
hideous shivering cry and lay still. 

The hobbits remained flat on the ground, as Grishnakh 
had left them. Another horseman came riding swiftly to his 
comrade¡¯s aid. Whether because of some special keenness of 
sight, or because of some other sense, the horse lifted and 
sprang lightly over them; but its rider did not see them, lying 
covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, 
and too afraid to move. 

At last Merry stirred and whispered softly: ¡®So far so good; 
but how are we to avoid being spitted?¡¯ 

The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grish- 
nakh had roused the Ores. From the yells and screeches that 
came from the knoll the hobbits guessed that their disappear- 
ance had been discovered: Ugluk was probably knocking off 
a few more heads. Then suddenly the answering cries of 
orc-voices came from the right, outside the circle of watch- 
fires, from the direction of the forest and the mountains. 
Mauhur had apparently arrived and was attacking the 
besiegers. There was the sound of galloping horses. The 
Riders were drawing in their ring close round the knoll, 
risking the ore-arrows, so as to prevent any sortie, while a 
company rode off to deal with the newcomers. Suddenly 
Merry and Pippin realized that without moving they were 



596 


THE TWO TOWERS 


now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and 
escape. 

¡®Now,¡¯ said Merry, ¡®if only we had our legs and hands free, 
we might get away. But I can¡¯t touch the knots, and I can¡¯t 
bite them.¡¯ 

¡®No need to try,¡¯ said Pippin. ¡®I was going to tell you: I¡¯ve 
managed to free my hands. These loops are only left for 
show. You¡¯d better have a bit of lembas first.¡¯ 

He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. 
The cakes were broken, but good, still in their leaf- wrappings. 
The hobbits each ate two or three pieces. The taste brought 
back to them the memory of fair faces, and laughter, and 
wholesome food in quiet days now far away. For a while they 
ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless of the cries and 
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to 
the present. 

¡®We must be off,¡¯ he said. ¡®Half a moment!¡¯ Grishnakh¡¯s 
sword was lying close at hand, but it was too heavy and 
clumsy for him to use; so he crawled forward, and finding 
the body of the goblin he drew from its sheath a long sharp 
knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds. 

¡®Now for it!¡¯ he said. When we¡¯ve warmed up a bit, per- 
haps we shall be able to stand again, and walk. But in any 
case we had better start by crawling.¡¯ 

They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that 
helped them; but it seemed a long slow business. They gave 
the watch-fire a wide berth, and wormed their way forward 
bit by bit, until they came to the edge of the river, gurgling 
away in the black shadows under its deep banks. Then they 
looked back. 

The sounds had died away. Evidently Mauhur and his 
¡®lads¡¯ had been killed or driven off. The Riders had returned 
to their silent ominous vigil. It would not last very much 
longer. Already the night was old. In the East, which had 
remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale. 

We must get under cover,¡¯ said Pippin, ¡®or we shall be 
seen. It will not be any comfort to us, if these riders discover 



THE URUK-HAI 


597 


that we are not Ores after we are dead.¡¯ He got up and 
stamped his feet. ¡®Those cords have cut me like wires; but 
my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What 
about you, Merry?¡¯ 

Merry got up. ¡®Yes,¡¯ he said, ¡®I can manage it. Lembas does 
put heart into you! A more wholesome sort of feeling, too, 
than the heat of that ore-draught. I wonder what it was made 
of. Better not to know, I expect. Let¡¯s get a drink of water to 
wash away the thought of it!¡¯ 

¡®Not here, the banks are too steep,¡¯ said Pippin. ¡®Forward 
now!¡¯ 

They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line 
of the river. Behind them the light grew in the East. As they 
walked they compared notes, talking lightly in hobbit-fashion 
of the things that had happened since their capture. No 
listener would have guessed from their words that they had 
suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope 
towards torment and death; or that even now, as they knew 
well, they had little chance of ever finding friend or safety 
again. 

¡®You seem to have been doing well, Master Took,¡¯ said 
Merry. ¡®You will get almost a chapter in old Bilbo¡¯s book, if 
ever I get a chance to report to him. Good work: especially 
guessing that hairy villain¡¯s little game, and playing up to 
him. But I wonder if anyone will ever pick up your trail and 
find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid 
yours is gone for good. 

¡®I shall have to brush up my toes, if I am to get level with 
you. Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This 
is where he comes in. I don¡¯t suppose you have much notion 
where we are; but I spent my time at Rivendell rather better. 
We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end of the 
Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.¡¯ 

Even as he spoke the dark edge of the forest loomed up 
straight before them. Night seemed to have taken refuge 
under its great trees, creeping away from the coming Dawn. 

¡®Lead on, Master Brandybuck!¡¯ said Pippin. ¡®Or lead back! 



598 


THE TWO TOWERS 


We have been warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing 
will not have forgotten that.¡¯ 

¡®I have not,¡¯ answered Merry; ¡®but the forest seems better 
to me, all the same, than turning back into the middle of a 
battle.¡¯ 

He led the way in under the huge branches of the trees. 
Old beyond guessing, they seemed. Great trailing beards of 
lichen hung from them, blowing and swaying in the breeze. 
Out of the shadows the hobbits peeped, gazing back down 
the slope: little furtive figures that in the dim light looked like 
elf-children in the deeps of time peering out of the Wild 
Wood in wonder at their first Dawn. 

Far over the Great River, and the Brown Lands, leagues 
upon grey leagues away, the Dawn came, red as flame. Loud 
rang the hunting-horns to greet it. The Riders of Rohan 
sprang suddenly to life. Horn answered horn again. 

Merry and Pippin heard, clear in the cold air, the neighing 
of war-horses, and the sudden singing of many men. The 
Sun¡¯s limb was lifted, an arc of fire, above the margin of 
the world. Then with a great cry the Riders charged from the 
East; the red light gleamed on mail and spear. The Ores 
yelled and shot all the arrows that remained to them. The 
hobbits saw several horsemen fall; but their line held on up 
the hill and over it, and wheeled round and charged again. 
Most of the raiders that were left alive then broke and fled, 
this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But 
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward 
resolutely in the direction of the forest. Straight up the slope 
they charged towards the watchers. Now they were drawing 
near, and it seemed certain that they would escape: they had 
already hewn down three Riders that barred their way. 

¡®We have watched too long,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®There¡¯s Ugluk! 
I don¡¯t want to meet him again.¡¯ The hobbits turned and fled 
deep into the shadows of the wood. 

So it was that they did not see the last stand, when Ugluk 
was overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of 



THE URUK-HAI 


599 


Fangorn. There he was slain at last by Eomer, the Third 
Marshal of the Mark, who dismounted and fought him sword 
to sword. And over the wide fields the keen-eyed Riders 
hunted down the few Ores that had escaped and still had 
strength to fly. 

Then when they had laid their fallen comrades in a mound 
and had sung their praises, the Riders made a great fire and 
scattered the ashes of their enemies. So ended the raid, and 
no news of it came ever back either to Mordor or to Isengard; 
but the smoke of the burning rose high to heaven and was 
seen by many watchful eyes. 



Chapter 4 


TREEBEARD 


Meanwhile the hobbits went with as much speed as the dark 
and tangled forest allowed, following the line of the running 
stream, westward and up towards the slopes of the moun- 
tains, deeper and deeper into Fangorn. Slowly their fear of 
the Ores died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling 
feeling came over them, as if the air were too thin or too 
scanty for breathing. 

At last Merry halted. ¡®We can¡¯t go on like this,¡¯ he panted. 
¡®I want some air.¡¯ 

¡®Let¡¯s have a drink at any rate,¡¯ said Pippin. ¡®I¡¯m parched.¡¯ 
He clambered on to a great tree-root that wound down into 
the stream, and stooping drew up some water in his cupped 
hands. It was clear and cold, and he took many draughts. 
Merry followed him. The water refreshed them and seemed 
to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink 
of the stream, dabbling their sore feet and legs, and peering 
round at the trees that stood silently about them, rank upon 
rank, until they faded away into grey twilight in every 
direction. 

¡®I suppose you haven¡¯t lost us already?¡¯ said Pippin, leaning 
back against a great tree-trunk. ¡®We can at least follow the 
course of this stream, the Entwash or whatever you call it, 
and get out again the way we came.¡¯ 

We could, if our legs would do it,¡¯ said Merry; ¡®and if we 
could breathe properly.¡¯ 

¡®Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here,¡¯ said Pippin. ¡®It 
reminds me, somehow, of the old room in the Great Place of 
the Tooks away back in the Smials at Tuckborough: a huge 
place, where the furniture has never been moved or changed 
for generations. They say the Old Took lived in it year after 


TREEBEARD 


601 


year, while he and the room got older and shabbier together 
- and it has never been changed since he died, a century ago. 
And Old Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that puts 
it back a bit. But that is nothing to the old feeling of this 
wood. Look at all those weeping, trailing, beards and whiskers 
of lichen! And most of the trees seem to be half covered 
with ragged dry leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can¡¯t 
imagine what spring would look like here, if it ever comes; 
still less a spring-cleaning.¡¯ 

¡®But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes,¡¯ said 
Merry. ¡®It does not look or feel at all like Bilbo¡¯s description 
of Mirkwood. That was all dark and black, and the home of 
dark black things. This is just dim, and frightfully tree-ish. 
You can¡¯t imagine animals living here at all, or staying for 
long.¡¯ 

¡®No, nor hobbits,¡¯ said Pippin. ¡®And I don¡¯t like the thought 
of trying to get through it either. Nothing to eat for a hundred 
miles, I should guess. How are our supplies?¡¯ 

¡®Low,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®We ran off with nothing but a couple 
of spare packets of lembas, and left everything else behind.¡¯ 
They looked at what remained of the elven-cakes: broken 
fragments for about five meagre days, that was all. ¡®And not 
a wrap or a blanket,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®We shall be cold tonight, 
whichever way we go.¡¯ 

Well, we¡¯d better decide on the way now,¡¯ said Pippin. 
¡®The morning must be getting on.¡¯ 

Just then they became aware of a yellow light that had 
appeared, some way further on into the wood: shafts of sun- 
light seemed suddenly to have pierced the forest-roof. 

¡®Hullo!¡¯ said Merry. ¡®The Sun must have run into a cloud 
while we¡¯ve been under these trees, and now she has run out 
again; or else she has climbed high enough to look down 
through some opening. It isn¡¯t far - let¡¯s go and investigate!¡¯ 

They found it was further than they thought. The ground 
was rising steeply still, and it was becoming increasingly 
stony. The light grew broader as they went on, and soon they 



602 


THE TWO TOWERS 


saw that there was a rock-wall before them: the side of a hill, 
or the abrupt end of some long root thrust out by the distant 
mountains. No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full 
on its stony face. The twigs of the trees at its foot were 
stretched out stiff and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. 
Where all had looked so shabby and grey before, the wood 
now gleamed with rich browns, and with the smooth black- 
greys of bark like polished leather. The boles of the trees 
glowed with a soft green like young grass: early spring or a 
fleeting vision of it was about them. 

In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: 
natural perhaps, and made by the weathering and splitting of 
the rock, for it was rough and uneven. High up, almost level 
with the tops of forest-trees, there was a shelf under a cliff. 
Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at its edge, 
and one old stump of a tree with only two bent branches left: 
it looked almost like the figure of some gnarled old man, 
standing there, blinking in the morning-light. 

¡®Up we go!¡¯ said Merry joyfully. ¡®Now for a breath of air, 
and a sight of the land!¡¯ 

They climbed and scrambled up the rock. If the stair had 
been made it was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. 
They were too eager to be surprised at the remarkable way 
in which the cuts and sores of their captivity had healed and 
their vigour had returned. They came at length to the edge 
of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they 
sprang up and turned round with their backs to the hill, 
breathing deep, and looking out eastward. They saw that 
they had only come some three or four miles into the forest: 
the heads of the trees marched down the slopes towards the 
plain. There, near the fringe of the forest, tall spires of curl- 
ing black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards 
them. 

¡®The wind¡¯s changing,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®It¡¯s turned east again. 
It feels cool up here.¡¯ 

¡®Yes,¡¯ said Pippin; ¡®I¡¯m afraid this is only a passing gleam, 
and it will all go grey again. What a pity! This shaggy old 



TREEBEARD 603 

forest looked so different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked 
the place.¡¯ 

¡®Almost felt you liked the Forest! That¡¯s good! That¡¯s 
uncommonly kind of you,¡¯ said a strange voice. ¡®Turn round 
and let me have a look at your faces. I almost feel that I dislike 
you both, but do not let us be hasty. Turn around!¡¯ A large 
knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders, and 
they were twisted round, gently but irresistibly; then two great 
arms lifted them up. 

They found that they were looking at a most extraordinary 
face. It belonged to a large Man -like, almost Troll-like, figure, 
at least fourteen foot high, very sturdy, with a tall head, and 
hardly any neck. Whether it was clad in stuff like green and 
grey bark, or whether that was its hide, was difficult to say. 
At any rate the arms, at a short distance from the trunk, were 
not wrinkled, but covered with a brown smooth skin. The 
large feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long 
face was covered with a sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost 
twiggy at the roots, thin and mossy at the ends. But at the 
moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes. These deep 
eyes were now surveying them, slow and solemn, but very 
penetrating. They were brown, shot with a green light. Often 
afterwards Pippin tried to describe his first impression of 
them. 

¡®One felt as if there was an enormous well behind them, 
filled up with ages of memory and long, slow, steady thinking; 
but their surface was sparkling with the present; like sun 
shimmering on the outer leaves of a vast tree, or on the ripples 
of a very deep lake. I don¡¯t know, but it felt as if something 
that grew in the ground - asleep, you might say, or just feeling 
itself as something between root-tip and leaf-tip, between 
deep earth and sky had suddenly waked up, and was con- 
sidering you with the same slow care that it had given to its 
own inside affairs for endless years.¡¯ 

¡® Hmm , Hoorn,¡¯ murmured the voice, a deep voice like a 
very deep woodwind instrument. ¡®Very odd indeed! Do not 



604 the two towers 

be hasty, that is my motto. But if I had seen you, before I 
heard your voices - I liked them: nice little voices; they 
reminded me of something I cannot remember - if I had seen 
you before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, 
taking you for little Ores, and found out my mistake after- 
wards. Very odd you are, indeed. Root and twig, very odd!¡¯ 
Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under 
those eyes he felt a curious suspense, but not fear. ¡®Please,¡¯ 
he said, ¡®who are you? And what are you?¡¯ 

A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; 
the deep wells were covered over. ¡®Hrum, now,¡¯ answered the 
voice; ¡®well, I am an Ent, or that¡¯s what they call me. Yes, 
Ent is the word. The Ent, I am, you might say, in your 
manner of speaking. Fangorn is my name according to some, 
Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.¡¯ 

¡®An Ent? said Merry. ¡®What¡¯s that? But what do you call 
yourself? What¡¯s your real name?¡¯ 

¡®Hoo now!¡¯ replied Treebeard. ¡®Hoo! Now that would be 
telling! Not so hasty. And / am doing the asking. You are in 
my country. What are you, I wonder? I cannot place you. 
You do not seem to come in the old lists that I learned when 
I was young. But that was a long, long time ago, and they 
may have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did 
it go? 

Learn now the lore of Living Creatures! 

First name the four, the free peoples: 

Eldest of all, the elf-children; 

Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses; 

Ent the earthbom, old as mountains; 

Man the mortal, master of horses: 

Hm, hm, hm. 

Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, 

Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter; 

Hound is hungry, hare is fearful . . . 



TREEBEARD 


605 


hm, hm. 


Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture, 

Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest, 

Swan the whitest, serpent coldest . . . 

Hoom, hm; hoom, hm, how did it go? Room turn, room turn, 
roomty toom turn. It was a long list. But anyway you do not 
seem to fit in anywhere!¡¯ 

¡®We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and 
the old stories,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®Yet we¡¯ve been about for quite 
a long time. We¡¯re hobbits .¡¯ 

Why not make a new line?¡¯ said Pippin. 

¡®Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers. 

Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) 
and you¡¯ve got it.¡¯ 

¡®Hm! Not bad, not bad,¡¯ said Treebeard. ¡®That would do. 
So you live in holes, eh? It sounds very right and proper. 
Who calls you hobbits, though? That does not sound Elvish 
to me. Elves made all the old words: they began it.¡¯ 

¡®Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,¡¯ said 
Pippin. 

¡®Hoom, hmm! Come now! Not so hasty! You call yourselves 
hobbits? But you should not go telling just anybody. You¡¯ll 
be letting out your own right names if you¡¯re not careful.¡¯ 

We aren¡¯t careful about that,¡¯ said Merry. ¡®As a matter of 
fact I¡¯m a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most 
people call me just Merry.¡¯ 

¡®And I¡¯m a Took, Peregrin Took, but I¡¯m generally called 
Pippin, or even Pip.¡¯ 

¡®Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,¡¯ said Treebeard. ¡®I am 
honoured by your confidence; but you should not be too free 
all at once. There are Ents and Ents, you know; or there are 
Ents and things that look like Ents but ain¡¯t, as you might 
say. I¡¯ll call you Merry and Pippin, if you please - nice names. 



6o6 


THE TWO TOWERS 


For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.¡¯ 
A queer half-knowing, half-humorous look came with a green 
flicker into his eyes. ¡®For one thing it would take a long while: 
my name is growing all the time, and I¡¯ve lived a very long, 
long time; so my name is like a story. Real names tell you the 
story of the things they belong to in my language, in the Old 
Entish as you might say. It is a lovely language, but it takes 
a very long time to say anything in it, because we do not say 
anything in it, unless it is worth taking a long time to say, 
and to listen to. 

¡®But now,¡¯ and the eyes became very bright and ¡®present¡¯, 
seeming to grow smaller and almost sharp, ¡®what is going on? 
What are you doing in it all? I can see and hear {and smell 
and feel) a great deal from this, from this, from this a-lalla- 
lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-burume. Excuse me: that is a 
part of my name for it; I do not know what the word is in the 
outside languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I 
stand and look out on fine mornings, and think about the 
Sun, and the grass beyond the wood, and the horses, and the 
clouds, and the unfolding of the world. What is going on? 
What is Gandalf up to? And these - burarum ,¡¯ he made a 
deep rumbling noise like a discord on a great organ - ¡®these 
Ores, and young Saruman down at Isengard? I like news. 
But not too quick now.¡¯ 

¡®There is quite a lot going on,¡¯ said Merry; ¡®and even if we 
tried to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you 
told us not to be hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so 
soon? Would you think it rude, if we asked what you are 
going to do with us, and which side you are on? And did you 
know Gandalf?¡¯ 

¡®Yes, I do know him: the only wizard that really cares about 
trees,¡¯ said Treebeard. ¡®Do you know him?¡¯ 

¡®Yes,¡¯ said Pippin sadly, ¡®we did. He was a great friend, 
and he was our guide.¡¯ 

¡®Then I can answer your other questions,¡¯ said Treebeard. 
¡®I am not going to do anything with you: not if you mean by 
that ¡°do something to you¡± without your leave. We might do 